“People don’t listen, they just wait for their turn to talk.” ― Chuck Palahniuk

-> Theater:

All acting is reacting. (link to the Spolin quote) In order to react, one must know what they are reacting to. This applies to both verbal and non-verbal communications.

Beginner improvisors sometimes end up boring audiences by putting out way too much information, way too fast in scenes and ignoring all context along the way.  Nervousness will often create run on sentences and a rush to fill in the silence with any words that pop up, never waiting for the lines to be absorbed and reacted to by the other players. This very often ends up with scenes without focus and confused audiences.

For example, let’s imagine this is first line of a scene delivered completely neutrally: “Here, have some tea Mr. Smith, I just bought a car and got a new job, and did you hear about Tom at the office, boy do my feet hurt.” That is a LOT of information, (though I have seen many student shows and jams over the years where scenes start with far longer opening monologues).  Worse yet, since it was said neutrally we have zero emotional clues to how this is supposed to be received. What is the scene even about? Which of those jumbled data points should the audience focus on? This asks our audience to do a ton of work to figure all this out.  The results is quite often silence while the audience is in their heads thinking or worse yet they tune put since it is too much to deal with.  An unengaged audience is a bad time all around.

Experienced performers learn that active listening goes far beyond words.  Words give us the data, but how that information was said and how that information is reacted to is at the center of drama or comedy. The best players watch their scene partners to absorb every movement, every tick, every breath to squeeze as much context from it as they can.  Even a simple “Here, have some tea.” can spawn whole rich worlds. For example if I say “Here, have some tea.” through angry gritted teeth, we now have a whole world to explore to learn why this person is angry.  If I say the same line with a flirty-lusty tone, then we immediately are interested in this relationship and how the other person feels.  Slowing down to pay attention to these details actually results in much more engaged and more entertained audiences

-> Development:

The best projects are the ones that not only fulfill the minimum requirements but also make the customer so happy (###link to Serve the Pice not the form#########) they come back repeatedly for other work and tell all their friends.  The worst projects are too often 'death of a 1000 iterations' and it seems your client is never satisfied with the results. What makes the biggest difference is solving the underlying issues behind the data of their requests.  We can use active listening to get to the core of what is really going on much faster than just relying on typed words.

Only a fraction of communication is the actual words said. The majority of human communication is comprised of body language and tone of voice. Part of what makes us human is our extremely advanced microexpressions, sometimes referred to as affects. When we are meeting face to face it is straightforward to tell with a very high degree of accuracy if people are sincere or sarcastic, delighted or angry, engaged or checked out.  Being in the same room really does help us understand what someone means and really is saying. Being present to your clients and stakeholders makes a huge difference in the quality of communication. Hangout and GoToMeeting are great, but if you can do actual in room meetings for these discovery sessions you will get the best results.

Really paying attention to what parts of the discussion make them excited vs timid vs apathetic will give you insight much deeper then the actual words themselves and let you know where to focus.  For instance, when you hear them very eagerly describe a particular wanted feature, you know you can really dig in on why they are so excited about it.  If they seem nervous about a particular part of the project you will know you will have to reassure them and can anticipate this will require special attention.  

Digging in to understand what the real personal stakes are for the client, a.k.a. the 'real' reason behind a project, might seem intrusive and and uncomfortable conversation. However, getting people to talk about what really motivates them and what it means to them personally is a pretty straightforward.  It can normally be spun as a positive discussion (#########Link to Starting with the obvious).  Understanding what is really at stake will help you get to the heart of any request as well as give you anchor points to remind them why they are doing this project as doubts and objections arise. If you are actually helping them achieve their deeper goals with the deliverables, everyone is going to be more satisfied.

In the over-scheduled world we live in, many projects come with rapid turnaround times. In the rush to do awesome work, it is easy to just charge ahead tackling the technical issues without taking time to see the larger picture through a discovery process.  To really dig in and understand what is behind a requirement might seem like an time consuming extra step, but it can mean the difference between never ending scope creep from unsatisfied users and insanely happy clients who will give referrals.


-> Exercise

Line At A Time Story.
It requires at least 2 players but can be played with any size group.

You are going to tell a story and each player is going to deliver only one sentence at a time.
Every sentence should make sense and build on what was just said and match the tone of the first person who delivers a line. This forces you to listen closely, not just the words said, but the context.

These don’t have to be good or exciting stories, but they should mostly make logical and grammatical sense.
Attempt to go faster than you think you can. That is called 'playing at the speed of fun.'

To help guide you, these stories can follow a story spine for structure. Here is the story spine as defined by Kenn Adams (http://improvencyclopedia.org/games/Story_Spine.html). Feel free to have this handy and start every new line with these progressive sentence starts:

“Once upon a time…”

“And everyday…”

“Until one day…”

“And because of that…”

“And because of that…”

“And because of that…”

“Until finally…”

“And ever since that day…”


Here is an arbitrary example I am making up now:

Player 1: (happily) “Once upon a time there was guy named tim who lived next to a mechanical tree forest.”

Player 2: (happily) “And everyday Tim would go looking for gold.”

Player 1: (concerned) “Until one day there was a great earthquake and he got trapped in the forest.”

Player 2: (concerned) “And because of that he had to climb a mountain.”

Player 1: (excited) “And because of that he met the great Eagle King.”

Player 2: (excited) “And because of that Tim saved the mayor from the fire in town that was caused by the earthquake.”

Player 1: (Happily again) “Until finally Tim was given a bag of gold.”

Player 2: (Happily) “And ever since that day Tim has never gone into the forest again.”

Remember the quality of the story does not matter, only that you are building on the previous sentence and building on what your co-players are actually saying.

TL;DR:

In theater, all Acting is reacting. You have to know what you are reacting to, so listen. Not just to the words but what is behind them.  
In development listening to stakeholders about what is really at stake means undersanding reasons beyond the technical scope.  It is important to have live face to face conversations.  You will always lose meaning in email or slack, even with emojis. 

Have fun and remember to actively listen to your team.