Bash is magic # No it's not

When leveling up as a developer, one of the most intimidating aspects often is using the command line interface, or CLI.  In fact, it might seem downright terrifying.  The reality is: If you can type, you can use the command line. 

Every senior level developer will remember a time when they got overwhelmed by opening the terminal. Those same people will tell you this is one of the most important capabilities they acquired.  

For Mac and Linux users your command line interface is Bash.  Windows users can also use this tooling, so Bash can unlock the true potential of any machine. Besides  gaining more control of your device, Bash lets you leverage hundreds of power tools like WP-CLI, Drush, npm, composer, and Behat, to name a few.

Leave this session understanding 
- A brief history of the command line
- The basic commands for manipulating your files and folders
- An overview of tools that are only available through the command line
- The basics of Bash scripting, the secret to automating anything

In the beginning there was the command line


Who should care?  

Linux/OSX/Windows using BASH users who don't know more than point and click

Newer users looking for a quick reference for shell scripting questions

programmers who work in linux and want to be more productive

People coming from Windows, including experienced admins who want to do more, faster


This talk is specifically about BASH, the bourne again shell, based on SH by Bourne, but everything we are thing about is also going to work on ZSH and DASH and likely KSH and PDKSH

GNU tool.  
why this matters
Free as in Freedom
THis means bash itself is extendable and customizable (but we are not going to have time to get into that

Don't be afraid of brute forcing a solution on the first pass.  
You can always opimize

Shell scripting is the glue that holds programs together

Yes, you can do it other ways...buuuuut 



Define Shell...but before we get to that

Steve Best Story

Why BASH - it is everywhere!

C was first, but it is actually quirky as hell
Korn Shell came next and people loved it, but it was not open source at first, so Linux said "no thanks" for the most part, though in 2000 they realized the error of their ways

BASH was an attempt at a GNU POSIX system
explain POSIX
Since it was OSS by intent, Linux embraced it

Bash is a Command interpreter
concept of a script

before the prompt - why this matters and why it does not and what to do about it





