NOTES:
Not every story is a good one, not every ending is happy.
On recursion explain the difference between And then And then and Because of that.
Workshop part takes longer than anticipated
http://polymath.io/2017/01/09/scienceofstorytelling/

Flat stories
It is OK not to participate or leave





Every project is a story: Applying storytelling to your client interactions

Humans think in stories. Every story follows a general pattern.  Once we learn to see these patterns we can more readily create new stories.  In this session we will explore these story structures and how we can use them when we deal with our peers and clients.  Learn how to translate your clients and stakeholders dreams into real plans by breaking down back of envelope designs into actionable stories. Beginners and seasoned professionals looking to level up on our human skills should attend.  

Topics will cover: 
Defining a story (The Story Spine)
Translating dreams into goals and actionable steps
Using the larger story as your roadmap
Driving your process with 'why'

Lisa Cron
As she says, opposable thumbs help us hold on, but stories tell us what to hold on to
--------------------------------------

It is easy to assemble facts and it is easy to dial the phone.  It is hard to know what exactly to do with that information or how to have a productive conversation that accomplishes project goals all the time.  There is a solid, repeatable pattern that comes from storytelling and improv that can be applied to any project to communicate more effectively.


------------------------

-> painting the picture of what is possible
-> A dream written down is a goal, a goal broken into steps is a plan an plan executed is a dream realized.
-> There is a story spine:
-> Scooby Doo example 
-> DISCOVERY and LISTENING:
-> Sales 101 -> Funnel 





->Every project is a story: Applying storytelling to your sales process (Story structure applied to sales: talking about the future state) 
-> DEFINE CREATIVITY

-> painting the picture of what is possible
-> A dream written down is a goal, a goal broken into steps is a plan an plan executed is a dream realized.
-> There is a story spine:
-> Scooby Doo example 
-> DISCOVERY and LISTENING:
-> Sales 101 -> Funnel 




-> Story structure applied to sales

Talking about the future state 
-> painting the picture of what is possible
-> DEFINE CREATIVITY
-> A dream written down is a goal, a goal broken into steps is a plan an plan executed is a dream realized.

So, how do we break these steps down in a way we can communicate to non-technical stake holders


-> There is a story spine:
Once upon a time
And everyday
Until one day
because of that
because of that
because of that
until finally
and ever since that day

-> Scooby Doo example 

This applies to anytihng that has a story
All businesses are stories

Once upon a time there was a place called the world wide web and a couple of guys (sergi and other guy)
an everyday these guys would use lycos or yahoo and hated the way it worked
until once day they decided to build google
and because of that they improved the way people thought about search
and because of that more and more people made Google their defualt search engine
and becuase of that when they introduced adwords their market was gigantic
until finally they made so much money they could do whatever they wanted, like build android or form Alphabet and bout our Lycos and run yahoo out of business
and ever since that day no one ever used yahoo or lycos ever again.  

That is a broad example

let's break this down a little easier
Let's talk about a potential client who has called you, let's call him bob
Bob is a baker who knows very very little about the internet but knows he needs more people to come into his shop.  
Talking about conversions and lead flow and hit rates confuses him.
So, let;'s use the story spine to explain the project

Once upon a time there was a backer names bob who had a kickass backe shop
and everyday bob would get a little trickle of customers, mostly through print ads and street traffic
until one day Bob did a social media campaign that centered on a rad landing page and coupon code
Because of that people who had never heard of Bob checked out the shop to redeem their codes
because of that those customers spread the word to their friends and the line formed out the door
because of that Bob had to hire more staff to meet demand
until finally Bob opened a franchise and had enough money to pay off all his bills
and ever since that day Bob was the most successful baker with the largest following in town

These are broad strokes, but story spine is also recursive.  
Let's look at one of the lines from the example we made up:
"Because of that people who had never heard of Bob checked out the shop to redeem their codes"
Let's start with the once upon a time
Once upon a time there were people who had never heard of bob, nor checked out his shop
and everyday they would buy things from other bakers
until one day they noticed a new offer on their social media stream
because of that they followed the link and saw they could get a free cupon code
because of that they downloaded the code onto their phone 
because of that they went to redeem their codes
until finally they had purchased Bob's baked good and a percentage of them really really liked it
and ever since that day those customers are repeat customers

Let's break this down further:
Lets dig into the line: because of that they followed the link and saw they could get a free coupon code

Once upon a time there was a communication method called social media where people got information
And everyday people would follow links they found interesting that was not bob's bake shop
Until one day some people followed a link for a baker
and because of that they saw pictures of the awesoem baked goods of Bob
and because of that they read the awesome reviews
and because of that they saw the location of the shop
until finally they saw the cupon code they would benefit from
ever since that day people on social media where interested in bob's links

you can break any part of the story down as far and as small as you want to go, '

So, how do we build such a story?  
-> DISCOVERY and LISTENING:
-> Sales 101 -> Funnel 

Discovery = why?
and really digging in to why

if we tell a generic story like bob's some people going to get it but we need to make it much more personal

now, let's imagine that Bob has a college aged daughter.  We find out in the process of discovery that more than anything Bob wants to be able to pay for some of her college and there is a specific number of baked goods that equal that increase in cash flow.

So, the story becomes 
Once upon a time there was a baker who was doing OK, but was not able to pay for his daughter to go to college.
and everyday he sold as many baked goods as he could using old fashion marketing which wasn't the most effective, but he made just enough money to cover his bills. 
until one day bob got a new social media campaign 
because of that people gave bob a try who normally would not have
because of that bob went viral
because of that bob had to open up a second store to meet demand
until finally bob had enough money to easily cover all his daughter's bills
ever since that day bob has never worried about money

