https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1-4rpZlwddqCRI-NX1E4qNLn0Hpe9zvvgPB6qS0_OOfs/edit?usp=sharing

Shipping-Content-talk-outline-notes.txt

Intro

Demo: Video - talk over it

	My blog
		me in the future.  
		Other possible use cases
			marketing content published to yourcompany.com/blog
			stop multitasking when creating content
			give content managers better tools

My use case
	Write locally in Markdown 				Markdown		
	Move to a Dev environment 				WP-CLI 	
		transform on move					WP Markdown + Gutenberg	
		Modify on Dev						Gutenberg				
	Test behavioral 						Wordhat		
	Move to Test 							WP-CLI (Terminus)		
	Test									Backstop.js	
	Move to	Production						WP-CLI (Terminus)
	Automating it							Bash scripting



Markdown and writing locally
writing copy in Gutenberg is kinda hacky to type directly into, since every carriage return gives you a new block.  Also writing online in docs unless you are group collaborating has a hundred daily dreads about it. 
	
Once content exists however, it is a dream to move it around and pretty it up

I want to make my content safely away from prying eyes on my dev server
and I should have a way to think about images later.  

Humans (me) are very error prone
	Formatting matters
Testing is required 


Thinking in component parts.  
Why? 
1.	Writing copy 
	What I want!
		distraction free
		can do it on an airplane
		never reset my session and auto save in case of 
		git content storage personally

2. Getting from here to there
	I '''could''' copy paste.... inelegant but effective
		also human error prone
	So, let's make machines do this
		Here is a quick example of what I mean:
					Demo the idea with `curl` and `curl -O` 	
https://gist.githubusercontent.com/mcdwayne/75d6a1a4499f530d6cfe139cd820bbd5/raw/70c28e6bd313627ba20142189f4568e564cc8bba/gistfile1.txt

		
3.  Testing 

	Behavioural
		
		WP-CLI lets us basically do that but also assign all the needed metadata
		ENTER THE CLI! 
				Quick intro for WP-CLI
					3-4 slides at most
				Demo of WP-CLI just posting things

		Basically if you can do it by hand in steps you can make the machine do it 	
			Space object start stop sandwich 
			Step 1 grab machine
			step 2 Pick up the machine
			step 3 put down machine
			step 4 let go of machine
		Enter bash scripting
			super fast to learn
			takes no time to install
			works on pretty much any linux server in the world
				this makes it ultimately how a lot of automation is done as is the case of systmes like CircleCI, Travis or Jenkins.  
			and is very, very, very well documented
			how well
			Open the terminal and type help
				Ultimately this is what I learned the best in doing all of this btw
			but that's a talk for another time



3. Testing


