WCSD Notes

Continuous Integration for WordPress Josh Cummings
If you like GUI, use Pantheon
DRY
Research, IMplement Iterate
Automate all the things
Don't confuse Continuous Delivery with CI
Both important!

Understanding and Supporting Web Accessibility Rachel Carden
Make your site/company/product more accessible
Contrast
colorblind
etc... (check twitter)

Flexbox for WordPress Joseph Abraham
http://flexboxfroggy.com/


Stephen Carnam
Keynote Day 2
Golden Rule is key
Robots and machines can suomate a lot of things, but can not replace human connectivity or creativity
Owning your won thoughts and factoring in other people is important
EFF

Themedreamer BECAME Serverpress
??SiteSynch for content?
Douglas Engelbart
Collective IQ

Wordpress codex
Slack channel
WP.TV

Jim Walker
WordPress Let’s Me Do It! 
Got SHAMED for not having HTTPS on all sites
Possible show will never show up on Google, SEO poison
Joomla to WP lessons learned


Carbon3d?   New studio Webdogs invited by client, levelten invited by Pantheon ?!?!, weirdness. Left bad taste - Ask Tim Clancy


WordCamp San Diego: Sunny and staying classy
I landed in beautiful San Diego just in time to go to the Advanced WordPress meetup, hosted by Matt Cromwell.  On the Lyft ride there I met my driver was doing shameless promotion of her brand.  I was impressed with her hustle enough to tell you to go check out her site: byfelicialive.com  In it's own way this was the ideal start to a weekend filled with the hustle and entrepreneurial spirit that is WordCamp San Diego.  

The Advanced WordPress meetup featured 2 amazing speakers who were there to answer questions about their respective products and insights on the whole on the state of WP.  From Ninja Forums, James Laws had trekked from Tennessee to the (NICKNAME FOR SD).  He was joined by the TITLE OF HIS POST of WooCommerce, Michael Tseco.  The conversation ranged from when is the right time to use which approach to ecommerce to long term support strategies for rolling out updates to NinjaForums. One interesting tidbit I heard was that there is an internal Woo team called "The Extensibles" who completely focus on, well, extensibility and are one of the main reasons the product is as versatile as it is.  It was a wonderful discussion made even better by a few choice refreshments.  

My hotel room was huge.  I got bumped to an executive suite, which was novel for me.  I didn't exactly know what that meant until I opened the door and did not see a  bed, but instead a living room.  Then I noticed the other door and found the entire bedroom behind it.  It is pretty common for my hotel room to be bigger than my apartment in SF, but this was a whole other level.  Very grateful to be upgraded.

The Food And The Fun:

Friday brought an interesting mix of seeing San Diego, preparing my talk and working.  Before I knew it I was hanging out with some of the other WCSD folks for some afternoon conversations to 'pre-party' for the Speaker/Sponsor/Volunteer dinner.  I returned to the same venue that I had been at for the AWP MeetUp, the really awesome Downtown Works space.  It was great to catch up with a lot of old friends and meet many new ones.  The food was fantastic (I had the Ai tuna) and the wine was even better!  Thanks to the WCSD crew for such a great and fun night.  Most of us called it an early night because there was an early morning on Saturday, but with so much excitement in the air, I for one, found it a little hard to sleep.   

Saturday morning brought with it coffee and many many pastries and tons of snack food options.  This was the best provisioned camp I have been to yet!  Lunch was pretty awesome 'box lunches' wth some really fresh and tasty choices.  I had a pretty great Thai chicken wrap.  The nature of the space mean't there was not really any way to sit all together, like there was the last time I was in SD (LINK TO SANDCamp POST), but I still had many great conversations.  

Saturday night was a pretty awesome party at The Italian Loading Dock