Can we talk for a minute about how much I love my job?  
Seriously folks.  I LOVE my job.  
The catch is I have a hard time telling you specifically what I do for a living.
My actual title 
as it stands 
is Agency and Community Success Manager
that means 
1) I help agencies who use the Pantheon platform.  That is about as far as that is defined.  If you need a quick technical question answered, I can likely help point you in the right direction.  If you need an overview of the stack and how to use the tooling, I can do that.  If you want to know who the right person to talk to inside the company should be, about any topic, why yes, I would love to help out. In fact, this is the first word in my title on purpose.  I have always argued I only really ever have done one thing at Pantheon: "Help agencies figure this stuff out." Whatever that means and whatever that takes.  
2) I get the extreme pleasure of participating in the WP and Drupal communities.  Holy crap people.  Let that sink in for a second.  Part of my job, which I get paid to do, is participate and be a part of the WP and Drupal communities.  I would further argue that in fact they are the same community, though there is some serious disagreement on custom content type conventions and various other implementation details (not to rant, but come on, we are all just manipulating strings using PHP.  Really.  Think about it.) But the tech that makes up these communities is the common vocabulary it is on fact not what comprises the groups.  It is the people and their passion for OSS.  They might not express it as such all the time but it is clearly there.  This underlying need to help information move freer and faster but leveraging code no one really owns and that we all contribute to in 10000 different ways. I could write a whole blog series on the various aspects, but if you just go read the existing 100000 blogs in the community write about this space you would see what I am talking about :)  Also, #WCKaraoke FTW!
3) I am a Success Manager. I am not a Representative, or Evangelists, or Advocate or any other such thing.  Not that there is anything wrong with those titles.  Those are great things.  I think I overlap with them all, but ultimately the thing I do is 'manage success'.  If we are working together in any capacity, I want you to look amazing and in the end I want us both to win.  I don't really even care what that means on your side necessarily, but it is true, I want us both to win.  I want everyone to win.  Winning is good and there is no limit to how many people can win at once!  it is not zero sum.  