##Kings Corners -
##Chris Lema - Marketing 

NOTES ON FORMAT
Chris Lema
--> = original question asker
->Someone else in crowd comments

Chris Lema gave us a small framework for marketing products, services.
A design framework really. 
Pain. Gain. Claim.
Pain - thinking of a particular kind of customer, what pain are they trying to solve
Holistically, what pain do they have, realize there are many pains, 
You are just going to focus on the top pains.
If recognize their pain and they recognize that you recognize that.
If you start with, for example, "you have sweaty feet?" and they do, they are going to be on board
vs a more general "Our Shoes are good" which is not exactly their pain, they don't care.
Gain - 
Give them a Final Destination, meaning if you do pick the service, what is upside? 
Sell them the new reality.  
That the basis of Pain and Gain, 
everyone does it
Go further
Claim: The differentiator
What makes your solution stand out, unique?
If you can relieve their pain, translates the gains into product features
Take the narrative and weave it into product, 
Makes a more compelling offering.
This requires admitting you are part of the sales marketing effort
Many folks wrongly think of Sales and Marketing as extra step on top of product
It is not.  It is critical to weave the marketing into product. 
Makes the product more compelling
For example, 
Updating plugin automation feature with a preview gets at the pain (updates and fear of breaking) and shows you the gain (preview of working site and control to deploy or not) in product
A good service example is Rental Cars.  Most places you rent a car and first drive to them. Enterprise on the other hand comes to you.  
Weave pain gain and gain into product itself.  



-->Kanban for WordPress (plugin), Offer a solution like trello, feel they are a solution looking for a problem.  Issue is you can do anything with Trello, so who do you market to?
Market to everyone = market to nobody.
->Who uses it for what?
-->Project management, job applicant tracking, sales tracking
-> idea of building landing paged
-->Working on it but stuck with how to approach specifics
Calles this a Horizontal solution
This is selling service across many use cases, 
Email is a good example, you can use it for 1000s of different things, but same solution overall.
Recommendation: take horizontal and position it vertically
Target a specific segment, in good depth and with narrative
If it can help chef using for grocery shopping and for him it is best grocery list ever, so market it that way for other chefs
If it can help a musician book jigs, it is a Booking platform for musician with built in lead conversion management, 
Narrative must be specific to audience
Verticalize it!
-> Develop user personas to find unique pains
-> how do you merge verticals into a homepage? Do you ask "Are you a teacher?", "Chef?"  How do you do it?
-> Most customers don't find you through a homepage, landing pages are more the thing you need, but still need a homepage
How many have ever said "Our product makes it easy" or "our service providers care about quality?"  
Everyone right!?
More often that not, on homepage pitch one of those with a list of personas to track to landing page
-> WPninjas - avatars for their customers go all out describing who they are
->what does 'Jim's desk look like?", 'what does he wear?', 'etc?'  personalize to a avatar, 
also call this a persona, many names for it
just flesh out persona to pain and gains and humanize it too
It is important to consider what other products they would be using when thinking of them
But a Cardboard cutouts, while interesting don't really do anything or help our work

--> How do you differentiate a compelling point in a horizontal when there are so many to pick?
You have to talk to a lot of people, 
Chris searches on LinkedIN, offers to pay folks for their time to ask questions
Hear their pain that way 
in end most of them don't want the $, just want to talk
Compliment first and ask them about their experience and research
You will learn their vocabulary that way
first few conversations just learning terms
heads in beds for hotel industry for example
Know nothing first few conversations
But by last questions know what is going on
->How about survey, asking the audience directly? 
-> Surveys are good but Multiple choices BAD, free form and read the answers! Othereise box them into your buckets.
Beware selection bias
Feedback can be limited, but getting data points from outside sources are great
google survey is good, multiple choice gets fastest reply
super fast responses overnight to things like 'who is using which buffer or no buffer"
fast data
specific to container of multiple choice

--> GiveWP Plugin, putting people first in brand, GiveStories, highlighting charity, front center on homepage. But sometimes there is a misunderstanding of what Give goes sometimes (once they thought it was a plugin for deaf children??)
When move into a new town you search for a new church, 
pics on homepage is going to be the type of people (polyester suit wearing, stuffy or shorts  and tee shirt folks) give first impression, 
Stories are part of the dynamic, 
Need to tell multiple stories
Donations for deaf children, for fire victims, etc
Show off all verticals, people see themselves in the vertical
->technical response to problem, how to show those off, grid?  Slider? hard questions
--> Many people not great at marketing but clients in general are, how to leverage affiliate programs
--> Kickbacks must be worth it, Make it super easy to share all stuff and banner ads, make it so don't have to worry about brand management 
At LiquidWeb thebrand manager makes Chris give her quotes and distributes those to the affiliates, 
quotes to the masses for reuse into their marketing.
help affiliates by giving them information, custom knowledge, specialized knowledge.
-->What about the strategy of having your Team writing posts for other's blogs/marketing.  Writing content unasked for, giving to people to cross promote?
Be careful for contacting people you don't know and telling them you are writing for them, establish relationships first
--> Have the conversation of what they are looking for. Think beyond just the pay check.
-> They are not really bloggers, but having devs participating for plugin cross promotion working better
Mining relationships is helpful

-> Comment from earlier conversation: Don't use survey already has bias - Google COnsumer Surveys

--> 3 WooCommerce plugins, how do they find that verticle and value of testimonials?
Testimonials first
-> Participant once had a contract for Salesforce doing analytics. They interviewed users, both successful and unsuccessful ones. Salesforce uses all the testimonials.  2 people and stories on every page, always a face and friendly and quotes, 
-> WPGive features, embedded in each site page feature tied to a testimonial
->#1 pitfall, all testimonials on one page
Are you putting testimonials on the Checkout or cart pages?  Why not?
Need to give last minute 'feel good' reassuring push to buy
->using Testimonials on individual feature page, testimonials on the emails
testimonials in emails in social media, every bit helps, liberal use
-> type of testimonials matter
Yes, checkout you want to use an A to B transformation example
Feature general "great quality assured" is more a fit to prove you are good people on homepage.
Paid support pages, you for sure want to have good support testimonials
-> reverse engineer your customer's quotes as testimonials
Successful happy customers vernacular is the best sales copy!!!!!!
make it part of sale copy, 
Also your support tickets
look at the XYZ of what they solved and generalize that up to let others know how it was solved 
-> change 'does' in their clients, reverse in marketing to copy to 'doesn't' 
-> product with multiple features - focus on the one feature and unpack it best you can, eye catching quotes gets people to meander through features through compelling breadcrumbs

-->Don't have CS background, self taught, online videos, really interested in what online learning and education in future and effectiveness of video learning
Future of online learning?
--> What is effectiveness of online courses to sell product?
Current modality assumes more time and attention than you really do.
Crazy neuroscience is brain releases the same 'feel good' chemicals when you buy a course as when finishing the course
This why we do it; buy a course and feel 'done' 
Buying books the same way
most online courses are designed to sit still a length of time 20-60 minutes
how do we do education 2 minutes at a time?
And on mobile phone?
everyone has a phone and use for anything, even as ID and keys now.
how do we educate on phone in short bursts?
messengers and text we all use constantly, how do we integrate that with video snippets? 
We need long sequences that change base on your progression and other factors.
Need to keep giving brain chemical hits when needed to keep motivated
-> Augmented reality?
General gut feeling: If makes me look dumb not going to use it so not sure about AR.
-> Virtual reality getting amazing, can put slides on your phone, practice public speaking in front of virtual crowd, impressive new use.
Chris has a Pixel device to play with VR, but not sure how it is going to take off
takes longer than ever imagine (Hofstadter's law)
-> LMS lot of opportunity on the teacher side, needing audience feedback a lot, room to grow and improve there in tech.

--> Webinar series just started, 3 or 4 in no one joining now, what you think of Webinar vs Video project?
John Grisham example (time to kill flopped on first release, then became best seller once he had a first bestseller years later)
Got to keep going to get first 'hit'
Then people will go back and consume
Try everything, hypothesis making as you go along
Got to keep doing it, just like Norcross talked about today
People will buy it and feel good anyway :)
->Do you target webinar to specific audience?
-->Yes, "intro to..." technical topics.
Very few people go to Google with 'intro to...'
start with the pain, look what people are looking for 
search linked to video more findable 
2 minute video, leads to other content
Internally realize there is no magic button for insecurity, 
Just do it over and over again and you know it inside and out
Demonstrate confidence in face of insecurity
--> Guests? giving wider range of expertise and confidence, perennial info as well, relatable and empathy going, that is podcast material
Other thing to note, writing sales copy is hard and you should ask for help
Hire pros, worth it, better than you looking 1/2 done
Ultimately though, just publish

-->How do you pivot your brand?
Does anyone try to change focus and go well online?
(mixed audience reply)
Xmas time wrote about generosity
people said "Stop it get back to WP, wasting our time" 
wtf? right!?!
give refund, oh right, this was free :)
Pivots are hard because people feel relationship to connection 
Your brand is not all yours' 
Your brand is what other people say about you, 
Pivot slow and convince your base this is good for you and them
you will lose some people in a pivot it is OK
draft on someone else who is not them.
For example if you market a new course as for "people who can't afford other courses" 
"This one is for you"
then empathy from old users who realize you are trying to reach a larger audience who are not just them
Move slowly and leverage your audience to pivot
-> Sometimes pivot with same audience fails, can't do it
Either throw it in trash and start over or slow pivot
Free advice, if spinning up site, maybe don't put your name on the domain, makes a pivot super hard
imagine you want o sell it?  Nope!
Offered as joke to sell Chrislema.com for $100K
someone offered, which he refused because, first it meant underpriced his site 
and 2, who wants to have someone else own their name?
->personal brand vs product brand, brand is our brand or my brand?
Has built brands for tech companies and people and sass, not his name but linked to it
-> 'I was my brand', couldn't pivot so she sold, had to let it go

---> Raise prices, don't give discounts?
Raise prices = YES
Discounts, complex
Mentality is don't trade less $ for hours.
Those folks are not charging enough
Lawyers for instance charging $750 an hour, trading $ for hours are not complaining
problem is how much money we ask for is the issue
->intro pricing?
Great in general also that is a utilization based pricing, which is great. 
Price is always price, but discount for matinee or elderly for instance
Messaging of reason for discounts are not arbitrary
do not bargain basement discount for pricing
race to bottom, no one wins
-> Non-profit discounts?
Great use case, like students, that is utilization pricing
->talk to personas to understand discount effects, why it matters to them, do homework on discounts as much as real price
-> $5 Mussels and Martini Mondays is a great utilization discount for people who like those things
-->Is turning conversation more toward websites (looking at service companies) not a lot of great content and info on her website homepage, her users find their expertise from their search, front page is not pretty, 'knows better' but no time to figure it out (cobbler's son wears no shoes), simplicity, content need pretty, What are people really looking for
Think about own experiences when get to a homepage
He has just looked at site and reviewed site: not good
Had Hero image of a vid snapshop, no vid play button,  Click on it and takes you to new page, 3 share buttons, and youtube link on side, then form to fill in on right.  Very confusing
He left feeling confused!
Means I will never spend a penny with you, 
Everything needs fixed, get a designer right away
Gut check of 'was this designed in last year or old' profesional or not
think of restaurants when traveling.
before you look at food or menu or price you look at the outside 
You ask yourself "do I want to walk throug thouse doors?" or "can I be their kind of customer?" or even "do I want to be?"
visceral gut check
is there a clear pain statement?
That I identify with personally
Do you tell people what you do?
->GiveWP had a lot of time thinking on this on their site, paid off
->When someone goes to site, they are worried "am I safe?". A gut check, then what is it and who is it for! 
Yes!
Back to restaurant example, if a sports coat required, not for me
prices and menu outside and looks OK, go to most likely go there

-->On tracking, knowing all about them?
Don't put too many fields on the contact form
Survey had 10 questions, only presented 2 at a time
broken out to only see 2 per downloadable asset
progressive profiling
basic info using cookies builds up to only one bug survey but small chunks, more engaging and work better
-> Built site for an agency, Looked at how many leads come through site, it was very few and those are bad leads, so erected a barrier of entry through site, really had to qualify themselves to get through, everyone won
-> start with pricing barrier, don't entertain too cheap prospects
But be careful about this!
If you are a website builder he wouldn't put pricing limitation on your site
If you are advertising custom websites starting $2500
But offer a dropdown with specified levels up to $10K
limiting to scope $2.5K to $10K projects only in view of your customers 
but if someone like Chris referred and said "$50K kind of project" that client is going to think you are the 'wrong guy' and that hurts everyone's confidence and brands.

Wrap up and thanks!
