
Success is going from failure to failure without the loss of enthusiasm - Winston Churchill*

-> Theater:

No one wants to fail.  Failure sucks.  On the stage though, fear of failure is a killer.  Not leaving the sidelines to enter a scene when you have an impulse will keep you there forever.  The fear of interrupting is far worse than anything you could 'do' to the scene on the stage.  Just being out there based on an impulse to add something is enough to build entire worlds on the stage.

Similarly, we fear silence and it gives us run on sentences instead of letting the silence settle in and let our minds find something more interesting to do.  Or better yet, give our fellow players time to respond.

One of the marvellous things about improv is that we have the safety of the stage.  There is a wonderful saying in the improv world that "mistakes are gifts."  Messing up and and doing something unexpected are part of what the audience craves.  Then going with that mistake and making the most of it is what makes improv the amazing art form it can be. Especially in this safe zone, the fear of failure is the worst because if you just openly embrace the mistakes you will find the most wonderful gift and learn the most valuable lessons.

-> Development:

No one wants to fail.  Failure sucks.  Indeed, failure on a production site can be as as good as turning in a resignation notice on mission critical projects.  Just as the stage gives the person on it a safe space to explore emotions and moves, we need a safe space to explore possibility of trial and error.  

Fortunately for us tools like Git and local environments give us the ability to make such safe spaces on our own.  The ability to feature branch and create environments which mirror production can give us a renewed confidence to just try "update plugin --all" to see what breaks, which would be terrifying on a live site.  Each time we blow something up we have the gift of logs and error messages to help us as developers improve our knowledge and think of new ways to approach problems.  Failure is literally how we really learn.

Often worse for the individual developer is the knowledge that we might fail in front of our peers.  Feeling like you are failing while coding alone, in private, is one thing. But to potentially look wrong or dumb in front of a peer is quite another and paralyses many people.  This is a fear we must challenge and conquor directly.  Working as a team means many ideas need to be brought forward and we need to accept that the majority are just going to be rejected either outright or after careful, excruciating, inspection.  Admitting that this is frightening and accepting that you might be wrong is the best way to get over these feeling.  This is actually very closely related to, or could argue is another facet of, imposter syndrome. Both carry the same imaginary threat of 'being found out'. Fortunately both can be treated with the same solution, namely saying out loud what exactly you are feeling and identifying it as a fear and nothing more.

If we don't overcome that fear and give into the urge to remain silence, it invites our peers to see us as being at best a non-contributor and at worst, apathetic.  None of your peers or managers are ever expecting perfection, but they do expect engagement.  Getting past our fear of failure in meetings and discussions goes a long way to helping us grow, not just as individuals, but as teams and communities.  


-> How to practice this with your peers?

Group Counting with Celebration:
Have everyone stand in a circle. The goal is for the group to count to a predetermined number, starting at the number one, one person at a time.  Anyone in the circle can shout out the next number. 
If more than one person says a number at the same time, you have to start over again.  
Instead of groaning when someone “messes up” and the group has to start over, everyone yells “Woo hoo! We failed!” and happily starts over.

Note: I recommend starting with the goal of getting to 20 the first time you do it and increment in future attempts.  I was once with a group that counted up to 100 and back down to 0.  I believe your team can find such group mind as well.  

TL;DR

In improv, fear of failure stops you from adding ideas and participating. Safety of the stage makes mistakes gifts.
Development: Git feature branching for the safety to fail and fail big to learn and grow.
Failing in front of your peers sucks, but fear of putting yourself out there can be seen as apathy and prevents us from learning from one another.  

I almost started this with the famous "fear is the mindkiller" monolog from DUNE, so here it is: https://youtu.be/kJsYKhEV6o0?t=1m50s

*Churchill probably never actually said this: http://quoteinvestigator.com/2014/06/28/success/