######
NOTE: from here on out I am doing these notes Blog style.  
Meaning, newest updates at the top.  New days/thoughts will be delineated with a row of ###'s 
#######
For reference:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affect_theory
and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%B6vheim_cube_of_emotion
#############
12/22/2015

Amplification vs Escalation:
You amplify emotion states and you escalate or heighten situation. Seems worth exploring how you can amplify enjoyment or fear without raising the stakes of the scene. Vice versa would be fun to explore as well.  

Seems these two things are very separate ideas and it is possible to isolate them.  Uqaqua explored the notion of amplifying their emotions/affects in the scenes isolated from any escalation of the scene content. In the first 2 experiments I gave a single word of inspiration and both times we saw a scene become about that suggestion.  That fact mixed with the amplifications of the chosen affects resulted in me as an audience member seeing any and all interaction with the suggestion as an escalation.  Really a refection and justification of the affectation rather than an actual plot-able escalation of events.  In the third and later attempts, realizing the suggestion/escalation correlation I was perceiving I changed the suggestion to a location.  This change did shift focus from the object, but yet again, we saw scenes that showed clear amplification yet, from an audience perception standpoint there seemed to be an escalation even though no attempt was made to do this. 

Next we looked at the isolation of escalation without amplification.  Scenes where the scenes got bigger/crazier/more dangerous but the reactions from the actors was neutral and not amplified.  
These scenes all read as attempts at deadpan humor.  My favorite moment was when Peter made a very grim assessment that all deaths had blended into one another but without any affectation, it produced a wonderful response.  I do think this is because the absence of emotion was pronounced.  By eliminating affect amplification we were able to produce enjoyable scenes, but we were very aware of this mismatch from our natural (learned) expectations of how escalation should affect emotions.  

So my current report on this is, that while these are in fact 2 different things, demonstratively so by the exercises we attempted, they are considerably linked one to the other.  Are they inseparable and the absence of one causes perception of the other?  Too early to tell definitively I think.  
So what does this mean for our stagecraft?  Ideally it will be useful to be this precise when side coaching I think. As the scene progresses we can coach for the amplification of reaction isolated from the events in the scene and vice versa.  Makes for a cleaner cue than 'react bigger' which can mean escalation or amplification.  

It is quite important to note here, in these trial scenes, we were acting with both participants isolating the amplification from escalation.  It was brought up after the fact that we did not attempt to explore these notions in character isolation.  I believe this accounts for Chelsea's point of a previous exercising working when only amplification was being attempted by one party. To be honest, I forgot about that attempt and didn't correlate Jill Bernards work with this idea with this nomenclature(perhaps because the concept of The Big 4 emotions is viewed as oversimplification by the affect theory structure).
  
Next step here is to re-run the isolation exercises with 2 people, only allowing one to isolate amplification, then escalation.  It also makes me wonder what the escalation isolation would look like in this scenario.  Also, want to explore with 3 person scenes and isolation of these elements.  Would it look like the short form game Playbook (where one character is reading from scripted lines)?

 
Other thoughts:
I fear we might be digging in to far on this concept, that does seem semantically and from a coaching perspective useful, but is this useful to the actor as we continually layer more and more bagage and responsibility on the psyches?  From one perspective it is useful to accept as true and move on, but the vary nature of this exploration is to test that notion of if a concept is true and what that means to the audience.  But I think there is a hazard here in looking too deeply into this abyss of semantic definition, no matter how conceptually useful.  

Next steps: While conceptually important, I am resigned at the moment, especially given the break coming over the net week, to briefly revisit this, but not let it become a focus for the work. Ideally relegating this to a noted assumption we must make if the rest of affect theory is to be applied.   


#############################################################
12/15/2015

Thoughts on consciousness as definition of a character, Acting as the infant, and The three depths of communications with the exercise of "Affect Gifting"


Upon study of Affect theory which so much of my forthcoming work will dwell on, there is the notion that consciousness itself of the feedback loop of our immediate Affect and use of memory to attempt to get us back to a positive Affect 'state' (what Thompkins calls 'Image').  This is intriguing to me because so much of what I have thought about is the why of what we do as actors.  As we explore the various acting exercises to explore various aspects of how to be good on stage, it is rare we step back and ask, in the bigger sense, what exactly are we doing.  I believe in part this is because we have innately been doing it so long, that similarly to breathing, we just do it without a lot of deep introspection of the subject.  Acting, then similarly is something all animals do from the moment they can interact with the world but if we remove assumption that we know what that means, to act, what are we doing?  Maybe not the most satisfying answer and perhaps simplistic one, is that we are behaving as if we are another animate being.  Acting is therefore really Acting As something.  
In scripted work, the thing we are to act as is clearly defined by the playwright and the author's burden of creating or recreating scenes that are plausibly identifiable is removed from our acting shoulders.  In Improv however, we very much carry this burden.  Unlike the isolated writer, we have the great advantage of immediate feedback from the audience if it is received as identifiable, which I think means it is watchable, and at best enjoyable.  
So, if we accept that consciousness is really just created from sensory inputs, affects to them and the feedback loop system of memory to drive actions to return to positive affect image, AND if we accept acting in improv as the behaviour of acting as conscious beings we are in charge of creating, we can simplify our viewpoint to the following: "Improv acting involves the conscious creation and manipulation of alternative consciousness."   Since we are not behaving as ourselves in the performance settings (though we will necessarily be heavily influenced by our own experiences) we will need to create or invent character memories AND adopt affectations that, while relying on our physical being to produce, are different that our natural affectations.  
This I believe is what all those character exercises are driving toward.  That we are assuming being another, completely new and fictitious persona.  

And we do all of this for comedy...



Infants and Exercise: Acting as the infant - 
In Thompkins work he explores the idea of the infant child's instantaneous affect to stimulus.  When we hear an infant howl, it is in fact not telling us "I am hungry" it is simply acting out Distress and Anger.  When a baby smiles with a wide open mouth it is showing excitement.  It does this untempered from any restraint and with the full force it can muster.  A baby that is surprised and then afraid does not worry what someone else thinks or how the information will be received by another because the experience, inform of memory, is not present to the infant.  
To restate another way, a baby will cry with everything it has got because that is the only reality it can know.  Not every stimuli will illicit the same level of response, (side thought: listening to the evolution of a day old infant's range of wail to that of a 3 month old would be revealing as to the way subtly of expression is informed by memory formation.) 
Left on their own, all infants would be unable to alter their states of being toward enjoyment and interest, but would still be in reaction to the negative stimuli of hunger, pain, dirty diaper, ect.  It is an evolutionary construct that their affects are interpreted by adults with memory of how to get the infant back to positive or at least neutral states.  Further it is also an evolutionary construct that the negative affect will impact the affect state of the parent, who also want to return to the remembered enjoyment and interest states.  
So it is similarly in the best interest of the actor as it is for the infant to express their affectations fully.  In both cases the affect states and intensity do not need to rely (should in fact NOT rely) on expected outcome.  This is far too complex and slow for the improv stage and risks being interpreted by the audience as false and as an attempt to deceive.  Thus, reacting to stimuli fully is integral to the evolution and maturity of child and actor alike.    
##

Exercise: Acting as the Infant
It is hard to be unencumbered by memory as an actor, so we must explore acting as infants to truly plumb the depths of these affect states. 

Have your actors walk around and find their NNY.  One they have it tell them to imagine they are babies who have just learned to walk (but don't ham it up, just freaking walk and be safe).    
Then walk through the 8 major affectations as babies.  Using the Cube model to move from the Positive to the Neutral then Negative. 
This is also a good exercise for learning the 8 basic affects to commit to memory, as we are unburdened from interpretations as we are acting as creatures without any filters.  

Observations:   
I honestly this would result in, like every previous exercise, the need to constantly urge the participants to ramp and modify commitment/expression to the affect.  This was not the case.  As we entered into the infant mentality I saw the actors completely give themselves over to the extreme of these affects without any pushing.  The only time I saw any reservation was when we got to anger, which is a scary thing to unleash as an actor.  Only after reassurance that it was OK to let the character lose control did I see the results I was after.  Hearing them howl as infants with unbridled anger was terrifying to me as a person but wonderful and rewarding as an actor.  There are few other experiences as a coach that compare to that :)
The range of the affects is surprisingly wide given there are only 8 states to explore.  The stern grimace of 'a little mad' is much different than the extreme of blind rage, but both inhabit the same corner fo the affectation cube.  Here is another example of the cube model with it's true zero point of center shining as a practical tool for coaching stagecraft, in that it gives a clear language to communicate intensity quickly.  

## 

Three depths of communication and the exercise "Affect Gifting"

After a very brief conversation with a colleague at a party, I came across the idea that you can separate communication into 3 basic layers 1 - informational exchange (A is A).  2 - Emotional state (affect state) the giver is conveying (A is A! delivered angry).  And 3 - The emotional state you expect and want from the other party.  I think the first 2 are very well understood but the last part was a new phrasing of the idea, to me at least.  There was a specific phrase that summed this up, (maybe Impact Intention?) but I can't recall here.  
This is exciting to me as I have been for a while talking about Emotion as being too limited a term or even idea to fully express the Emotion of the Physical - Emotion - Worldview dance that I think makes a defined character (also what makes a defined conscious entity).  In lue of the actual term I am going to shorthand it into Emotion and Environmental Factors or EEF (though admittedly, I think that is a dumb name, good thing it is temporary.  

Exercise: Affect Gifting
This builds on top of the space object exercise of gifting.  Simply reaching behind you, grabbing a space object and then giving to your partner.  You can name to object or have your partner do it.  This is a beginner exercise and I am not going to write more about it here.  

Have your troupe/class break into pairs (deal with odd numbers however you want)
Choose one player to be player A and the other will be B

This exercise is done in 3 steps/phases:
1) informational exchange state:  Player A will reach behind them to grab a space object and gift to their partner giving it with as close to neutral emotion as possible.  Just the raw fact "this is an apple" or "here is a squirrel".

2) Emotional State: Player A gives the exact same (identical) gift again but with a specific affect being attempted.  Player B is then to guess what affectation Player A was trying to convey.
(This is immediately useful as a way to get your players on the same page with emotional language) 

3) What I want you to do, what I expect you to feel: Player A gives the exact same (identical) gift again but with a specific affect being attempted AND player A adds the following two statements: "and I expect you will feel (affect)." "and I want you to feel (affect)."  
These two things might be identical (giving someone something nice and expecting and wanting them to have enjoyment is really normal for instance) but they might well not be.  For example if there is something like "here is your broken tennis racket" player A is likely expecting anger but wants interest and mild disgust as the worst affect from player B.    

This reveals a few different things to the players about how they are communicating their affect to each other and therefore to the audience.  An important note here is to NOT be funny through this exercise and remind them that they are in fact doing an exercise NOT a stage practice.  



##########################################





Character Definition 

Basing everything on what the audience knows and expects, which means starting from reinventing our physical appearance, since that is the one thing the audience can, for certain, agree on.  From the first seconds of being on stage to 


*******************************************
Physicality (thoughts): 
	feet and spine position changes determine everything else
	how does this effect your hands/fingers/knees/neck/etc?
	how is this not NNY*? 
	If we can be aware of the subtle changes we can heighten those choices
	there is no bad physical choice, just bad commitment to it.  Although there are less longer term sustainable choices than others, be aware of that.
	after heightening these small changes into the known character traits.  
	how does this affect your breathing?  
	Breathing is key, it is the one thing you have no no control on doing or not, only how you do it.  	
	Breathing informs the rest of the character and communicates to the other actors and audience how this character is doing.   
	Breathe loudly, but not labored (unless that is the specific character choice)
	Now we have an observable character!
	The best way to

***************************************************************	
Definitions:
	
Observations vs Assumptions and Discovery vs Invention

Observations:
	We, the actors and audience, can only observe the current, objectively true physical state of the actor inhabiting the character they have created through modifying physicality
	Observations are limited to only things we, the observing group, can name and agree on.  
	This is an overly simplistic approach at first and actors will need to be slowly nudged into doing this, as our brains want to jump straight to invention.
	encourage people to say the most obvious thing they can see, this is deceptively hard for the uninitiated and you will need to be patient while they get the idea
	good examples of Observations are: 
		"Her feet are very far apart"
		"His head is cocked to the side"
		"Her hands are clenched"
		"His eyes dart back and forth and are barely open"
		"Her left arm is hanging lower than the other one"
	Just basic observations that our brains are constantly processing but we don't acknowledge consciously most of the time. 


Assumptions:	
	These are things that, based on the Observable State of the character are likely true.  
	For example: When we see a person with downcast eyes and slumped shoulders, who is shuffling their feet and taking long, heavy breaths: 
	we can assume that person is sad.  
	We can assume that person is having a bad time at whatever they are doing.
	We can assume that they are not going to be cheery and optimistic.
	We can assume that they would lose in a fight because they would just give up.
	Just like with Observations, most people will want to jump straight to backstory and invention, discourage this actively!
	We can not assume this person just broke up with someone.  
	We can not assume they are going to kill themselves.
	These are plot points/inventions/backstories, which we would have no way to agree on as true as an audience based solely on physicality.    

		Assumptions are things that, once set create what Johnstone calls the Circle of Expectation, an agreement that unless otherwise discovered will remain true and not break the suspension of disbelief that is needed for Theatre to work.
		THIS IS VITAL for understanding comedy.  The audience is on a journey with us and asking too much of them will alienate them and create an advisarial dynamic, maybe useful for stand up, but detrimental in the extreme to theatre.  
		anything we do that confuses the audience puts a stress on them that MUST be relieved by clarification in the shortest path possible.  
	Assumptions set the audience up for the 2 basic types of laughter: recognition and surprise.    
	If we take our character from earlier and give them a name that reflects their state, like "Mildred Downcycle" the audience will most likely react to the recognition that this name fits a depressed person very well. 
	If we discover that later on she has super strength, can laugh at the surprise of this unexpected new information.  (note, the key word here is 'discover'.  Inventing the attribute might violate the circle of expectation and result in a confused audience)  

This is critical to understand as a performer:
Observations and Assumptions are all the audience can do.  And they do it constantly and continually from lights up to final bow.  
Undestanding how to be clear as possible with our choices leads to more contented audiences and better overall show experiences all around.  
This is also the basis for how we communicate with our scene partners, but as actors we are not limited to these two things, so we are responsible for the discovery and invention of the scene.  

Discovery:
	Discoveries are the factual reasons why our assumptions are true.  
	There are countless ways to make discoveries, but we can and do make them constantly.   
	Discoveries happen on their own, by the decisions we make throughout the scene and show.
	If we base our behaviour on the observations and assumptions we are making about our OWN characters, these will be natural and rewarding as they occur.  

Invention:
	Inventions are the new pieces of information we must create in order to have a story.  
	There is nothing wrong with invention in and of itself, but too much will kill all believably and alienate an audience.  
	If we invent based on nothing, the invention will feel hollow and boring.
	If we invent based on Observations and Assumptions, the audience will remain comfortable in the Circle of Expectations. 
	Invention is mandatory for the McGuffin or start of a scene.  


Emotion:
Emotion is used here entirely as a shorthand for "The charachter as they are in this moment in time in relation to the environment and other characters"  Emotion plays the largest role and the thing that Audiences will best identify with so we will use it as our shorthand, but this is not the sum of the total sum of the above state.  
Observation will tell us what the face and body is doing at any given momeent and based on these things we can assume that the character is experiencing an emotion in reaction to the other things in the scene.
This is super basic but again we must approach this form an overly simplistic positionin order to properly consider the layers.
There are N number of extreme motions.  
Jill bernard of the HUGE theater taught me that there are really only 4 big ones, Mad, Sad GLad and Afraid (afrad), and while thi is extremely useful for new performers, more experienceed players will need to expand their range from these childish, basec archtipical states.  While there are many other models to use, such as emotional wheels, pyramids, and the like, the one I personaly like best if the Lovheim's cube on emotion based in neuroscience  Without trying to rexplain his theory in depth, there are 8 extreme states of emotions based on 3 chemical factors in the brain, Seritonin, Dopamine and nonadrenaline, this is not a chemistry course though, so let's for now accept this as true.  You can plot the levels of these things from 0 to 11 in a x, y, z avis 3d chart.  the resulting states based on study exist at the corners of the cube, so 8 states::
Anger, 
Joy, 
Excitement/interest, 
fear, 
Surprise, 
disgust, 
anguish/regret, 
sadness/dispair.
  
Being human and reading this I don't feel the need to explain these individually, but I will comment on Surprise.  Surprise exists as the most temporary of these emotional states.  It is the hardest to sustain beyond a few seconds on it's own in constant purity, so I like to start there when going through exercises, get it out of the way
This leaves 7 'steady states' that can be experimented with.  
If we examine the cube we see opposing corners and what I like to think of as transition lines, including the connecting corner lines which are not visible on the cube drawings, but logically exist. 

You will note that 

I wrote to 


**********************************************************************

Exercises:

Exercise 1) Explore the corners from 0 to 10:
Have the actors walk around and find the NNY.  
Then have them find a new character through oure physically.  Then find the Neutral of this character, ignoring the impulse to have an emotion (which we are default to do).  I think it is important to do this exercise of finding emotion extremes as a character for 2 reasons: 
1 - it creates a layer of safety for the actor that they don't have to be angry or sad or afraid, they are just being the character and 
2 - if the goal is to always apply this work to the stage it will be rare they do scenes as NNY, so rehearsing as the character yields more immediate and applicable lessons and benefits.

Once the actors have a character in neutral (the exact center of the cube conceptually) we can move them to an extreme corner.  This model also helps explain heightening in a linear fashion, if center of the cube is 0 and the corner is now a 10, very large and intense as the character can be played, then a 5 is the midway between these states, 2.5 is again another midpoint between states.  
As stated before, I prefer to start with Surprise, as it is the hardest to maintain on its own but serves as a great place to start with the various intensities.  I would start out ith a 1, moving slowly up and toward 10.  With Surprise there is no gradual, every new level they should be expressing will be a new reaction.  If you can find a way to gradually be more surprised without new information, please let me know how this is done, I am very interested in this.  
Once an extreme is reached you can either start them back at 0 immediately or, what I find more useful, is to walk them back down to a 0.  This takes time and will be frustrating at times, but the results are worth it, I assure you.  
This cycle of 1 to 10 will be repeated for the other corners of the cube.  After about a level of 5 or 6 it will take effort to push them to experience these emotions.  Again, reminding them that they are not THEMSELVES experiencing these emotions, but a character. 
Repeat this entire exersize with multiple characters or swap out characters between every fre emotions.  

Exercise 2) Going between emotions
Once we have a grasp on what the emotional states are for any character (not a short process for newer players) we can thenstart thinking about transitions between these emotions.  This is extremely useful for longer performance peices.  If the characters only exist for 1 scene under 3 minutes, we really only need to play with intensity of the emotions we find at the front end of the scene.  If we are doing a longer work though it becomes necessary to find other emotional states for the character or the audience will see these as one dimensional and not that engaging or intersting or engaging (a death sentence for an improv show).  
Again have the actors find NNY, then walk until they find a new neutral character.  Now walk them to a 4 or 5 in any emotional state.  Once they 'have it' and are comfortable living in this state, tell them ot hold onto it but let's gradually move toward one of the other motional states.  This will result in an intersting phenomenon where we discover a new neutral state that is not true 'center of the cube' neutral but not exactly any definable emotion either.  This is the bisectional axis of the cube.  The 'mid points' of the cube corner transition lines.  
Going from one 10 to another 10 is actually easier to do than 5 or 6 but 10 is hard to maintain fo the duration of a rehearsal or show, so 5 or 6 is far, far more practical for learning purposes since it is much more sustainable for an actor.  
There is no wrong to the how someone shows emotion but we should coach for clarity. 
The combinations of how to move between these emotions is quite numerous, but keeping a visual aide of the edges handy, which is another reason I like the cube model, is very useful and clarifies things for the actors and coach alike.  
Once you have gone between 2 in a cycle for a character, simply go to a new emotion and experience how that transition feels.  Again you will hit the neutral mid points that are not true neural.  It is actually very useful to have actors experience these fully as they will serve as guideposts to the later more advanced exercises.   
Again, this should be repeated for several characters.  Eventually hitting all 8! possible transitions. 
it is also interesting and valuable to experience the inverse of the transition, Enjoyment to Afraid feel different than Afraid to Enjoyment.   


Exercise 3) Combining emotions
I forget who said it, but one of my teachers said "we don't want to see conflict, we want to see conflicted characters." and "We don't want deep or complex plots, but please give us deep and complex characters."   It took me a while to fully grasp what that even meant,  I think this exercise is a good way to explore this idea.  
Again NNY start to Neutral character to one of the corners.  Now the goal is to hold onto that emotional state and also exhibit traits of the other emotion as well.  This is where Observation comes in extremely handy.  If we have an objective physical set of traits that lead to the assumption of emotion form the outside, we can combine these into new complex states.  
This is pretty complex to think about but we as humans have a LOT of experience doing it.  Nostalgia for instance is being enjoying, wistful, anguished and a little afraid at the same time.  
Using the cube model, these states exist not on the straight lines of the corner but somewhere inside the matrix of the cube.  Using the base chemicals as the X, Y and Z, Nostalgia could be (arbitrary of course) x=13, y =56, z = 79.  If each line is 10 units long from neutral to corner this is 10,000 emotional states to play with.  
** writers's comment** Not fully experimented with this with Uqaqua yet, so can't comment too far more, but this is in active devlopment a of time of this writing  ** /WC **
** Uqaqua put up with yet another set of these experiments.  



Exercise 4) finding the cause and triggers
** not fleshed out at all, this relates to Worldview more than anything else. **




 
Glossary
* NNY = Normal Neutral You - the actor without any character
Use: explain and reiterate that without fully understanding this super basic but taken for granted concept, we can not explore what it means to be a character, which is always just a variation of the NNY, so ully understanding your own NNY is KEY to everyting that can follow.






*******************************************************************




BELOW THIS LINE IS MY OLD BLOG NOTES:
******************************************************************
LEAVE A COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
WELCOME AND OPENING REMARKS

Intro (why this, who is it for).

Hi,

You are only bound by your imagination and ability to communicate.

I wanted you to know that up front.

Thanks for reading,  I am not going to ramble on about myself or name drop in this work.  I will do my best to be clear and concise in all explanations.

So why do I think we need yet another perspective on performing improv?  I really don’t.  I think if you boil it back to first principles of “Yes, and..” you can derive everything, so there is nothing I can write or say about those central axioms that has not already been written better.  This is not an attempt at that.  Instead this is intended to be a way to formalize my thoughts about some particular aspects of this art.

This is intended then only for me and I will likely disagree with most of it given enough time and additional experience.  But I feel I need to make more concrete some of the ideas I current harbour around improv, based on my observations to date.  If you find any usefulness in the work it will be a happy accident.

Dwayne

JUL 07 2015
LEAVE A COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
WHY TRUTH IS HARPED ON SO DANG MUCH IN THIS WORK

It occurred to me I have not fully explained the underpinning premise of this character definition process, which is to discover rather than invent the character with things the audience will fundamentally understands as true.

This method is basically overcoming 2 issues I see with newer improvisers which I feel lead to terrible, boring and downright awful scenes.  1) Improvisors get ‘stuck in their heads’ when they are in scenes because they have no idea how that character would actually react to the new information presented.  This leads to 2) Inventions that alienate the audience.

Most improvisors I have seen and worked with will simply start from a premise.  This is fine and well and good.  Nothing wrong with a good premise and I am not here to poo-poo it.   But one of the unfortunate side effects of  is that characters are often created to fill in an aspect of that premise, basically a one dimensional outline of a person to hold the joke together.  I say unfortunate because most improvisors will be ‘stuck in the scene’ once the original use of the slapped together character has served the intended use. Now, if all we were doing was brief 30 second scenes like a really fast paced La Ronde or Ka-Blahm-O! this does not really matter.  Most scenes and formats however require us to keep these characters around for 2+ minutes, sometimes multiple scenes and sometimes for entire shows.

Let’s imagine for a minute an improvisor has come into a scene with a really solid premise scene start that gets a good little lauch. Right after the initial base reality is understood another player makes a strong physical move, doing something unexpected and the first player freezes up.  This hesitation is most likely the actor’s brain suddenly panicking because the move was unexpected and are processing how to react.  This is a hard thing to do, to think about reactions before you have them.  The most likely outcome will be some kind of invention.

I am not going to dig into the difference between discovery and invention.  There are too many other books, blogs, etc about this topic to go too deep.  But I think the reason that the audience really feels the difference.  Discoveries feel like discoveries because they are make sense to us, that it is built on the reality we have accepted so far.  Inventions feel like they do because they come out of nowhere and don’t jive well with the base reality we have worked so hard to set up so far.

But if instead the improvisor, from our previous example comes in with a full-on developed character, then no matter what happens in the scene they simply need to react as that character.  No thinking, planning or justification, just reaction.  When we see how the character behaves when surprised, we the players along with the audience have then discovered something together.  When the character just opens their mouth and the improvisor gets out of the way we can have the freedom to uncover what is assumed to be true based on the physicality, emotional state and worldview of this character.  The audience will be on board as

—————

Post Script Thoughts

What I almost called this post: Want to get butts in seats? stop having terrible shows.

JUN 28 2015
LEAVE A COMMENT
EXERCISE
EDIT
THIS IS HOW I BREATHE – CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT EXERCISE

In a previous post I discussed how to use breathing as a tool on the path to character.   One of the exercises I have discovered to drive this home is called “This is how I breathe”

The pattern of the game goes  in 3 stages.  1) Character creation and demonstration of how that character breathes. 2) Observations of what is observably true. 3) making assumptions based on those observations.

I like to play this with the group in a circle, but you could do it with an audience and a single performer in front.

1) Character creation and demonstration of how that character breathes.

Whoever goes first should step out (or into the middle) and find a new posture and let it shape their breathing.  Walking around is really necessary in this process as we should rarely stand still for the whole life of the character.

Once the player feels they really have the character they will say “This is how I breathe, this is how I breathe’. Without altering the way they have started breathing they will move closer to all other group members to let themselves be heard breathing.  The group members’ job is to listen very carefully and also observe the physical traits of the character that emerged.

2) Observations of what is observably true

Once every group member has had the opportunity to listen to the breathing the group members, in no particular order, will then say things that are 100% observably true.  Such as ‘your breathing is very rapid’ or ‘your head is bobbing up and down’.  It is important to say things that are only observable and agreed on by the group.  If anyone says ‘well not really’ or ‘I disagree’ then it is retracted.  The truth of the observation must be unanimous.  When I run this I act as mediator and suggest you appoint one for your group through this exercise.

3) making assumptions based on those observations.

Once there have been a fair amount of completely agreed upon observations (happens quickly since this is a very basic , overly simple thing to do), we can then move onto what is assumed to be true based on the facts we just listed.  For instance rapid breathing and a brisk and stiff pacing to a character moments might indicate they are in a hurry.  Or that they are being pursued. Or that they are nervous.  Or any number of things, as long as the group agrees that is reasonable based on the observations.

We do not want to invent or say anything that is not based on observable facts.  So taking that same character from before, stiff and brisk paced, and saying we can assume they are relaxed and at ease would be a misstep.  Saying they are on fire is not supported by any of their actions or traits.  Saying they are a plumber is pure invention.  Saying they are running from an ex boyfriend who is actually a dragon is totally made up invention.

Giving them any sort of backstory is invention.

The goal of this approach to character is to give the audience something immediately relatable and something that feels completely honest and true.  We are still making things up, but we are doing true discovery by always starting from the real, non-disputable truth that is posture and breathing. So giant inventive jumps knock the legs out of everything we have built and make the audience well aware that we are just being clever.  This means we can’t really be real with these characters.  Ultimately it leads to a poorer experience for everyone.

If you feel like it you can extend the exercise a little further and engage this newly discovered character in scene work.

Post script notes for me (not for you)

(It occurs to me just now that I have not fully explained the underpinning premise of this character definition and trajectory rationale,  so another post will be needed to flesh this out)

Tagged Breathing, Character, Exercise
JUN 27 2015
1 COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
PHYSICALITY – PART 2 BREATHING AS A FUNCTION OF POSTURE

In part 1 I discussed how every character physically can be reduced to foot and spine positions, with the promise that everything else we need to know about the character will naturally result.

After we set our posture, even if we do nothing else and make no further choices, there is one thing that will be observably changed, even if just slightly.  That is our breathing.

Try this now, stand neutrally and breath.  Don’t change this, just observe, as if meditating, how the air enters and leaves your body.  How does this affect your core muscles?  How does this affect your chest?  Are you more of a mouth breather or all nose?  How does this all audibly sound?

Now make a change to how you are standing and the shape of your spine.  For effect, please make a larger choice than you normally might.  Now listen to your breathing and ask all the same questions of yourself you did before.  It is amazing how much even slight changes will affect you.

I believe that if you know how a character breathes you know everything there is to know about them initially from a physical discovery aspect. Not what we think is true or what we can invent for them, but what is actually observably true about these characters.

For example, if you have hunched over and your feet are very close together you will have more labored breathing normally.   This labored breathing is observably true and we can use this to start making assumptions of what must be true as well.  Labored breathing might be an old person or a sick person or a person with a heavy, heavy load.  From here we can discover together why this person is carrying a heavy load or is sick, but all these assumptions are reliant on the underpinning notion that this character has labored breathing which is observably true.

If we take this example and use it in a scene context, if a second character (player 2) enters to greet our labored breather who is trudging along and says ‘Is that the last of the cinder blocks?’ or ‘Well, the tests all say you are going to be fine, eventually..’ or anything of that nature, the audience will be right there with them on where this comes from and on the same page for whatever happens next.  But if the scene starts and player 2 says something that contradicts this fundamental truth the audience will start to drift off into a world of questions that are going to need to be addressed, potentially ending in inventions that might get a nice little surprise laugh or make a good button, but will feel dishonest comparably.  Like, “please Mr. Hercules don’t punch me again.”  might be a good juxtaposition move but will get a  wtf reaction from most audience members and requires a lot more justifications.

Starting with breathing then might seem like a better step 1, but this is actually very hard to maintain if you are not supporting it with the rest of your physicality.  Try that right now. Try just breathing different and then move around.  Are you actively maintaining this new breathing?  Have you had to adjust your posture to maintain it?

In summary:  Breathing is a mandatory thing for a living person to do and since all our characters are just variations on us, even inanimate objects or animals, the fact is we have to breath.  Letting this completely mandatory and needed repeated function influence everything else is a choice but not a hard one to make when you step out onto the stage.

JUN 27 2015
LEAVE A COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
ME AND JESUS – A WARM UP GAME

This falls under the category of easy pattern games.

One of my favorite things about the SF improv community and especially the teams I am on is the willingness to just go along with dumb ideas when warming up just for the fun of it all.  One day my Harold team Cat Dance just started clapping in a circle when waiting for a couple other team members to show up and I simply said Me and Jesus, someone else said something then I said Me and Jesus again.  Suddenly we all realised we had the basics of a simple pattern game right in front of us.

Me and Jesus.

Standing in a circle (or any shape really) everyone claps in rhythm together, slowly at first.

Together everyone sings “Me and Jesus”, which I will refer to as the refrain moving ahead.  The melody does not really matter here, the rhythm really does though, just make sure it is easy to repeat especially when sped up.  I like to sing it as G-G-E-G, like this ME and Jesus refrain

After every refrain of ‘Me and Jesus’ someone fills in the line with anything people could possibly do (or impossibly do) together.  Then repeat the refrain and the next person in whatever particular order you have decided on will make a statement, again something you and Jesus did or are doing.

When everyone has gone, the song has a short coda that goes “Jesus, Jesus, Jesus and Me” then the whole thing starts over but faster.  Again, like the refrain, the melody does not really matter, but here is what I like Jesus, Jesus, Jesus and meThe x x is clapping.

Then the cycle starts all over again but faster, concluding whenever you choose or when you are going to fast it is impossible to continue

EXAMPLE:

Amy, Brenda, Carl, Deb and Erin are in a circle.  Amy sets the initial tempo and then everyone claps the same beat.  At some point they start to sing

All: Me and Jesus

Amy: We’re going to Texas

All: Me and Jesus

Brenda: Filling buckets full of coleslaw

All: Me and Jesus

Carl: Taking out the garbage

All: Me and Jesus

Deb: Rewiring a blimp

All: Me and Jesus

Erin: Hanging Xmas stockings

Since they have completed the loop they sing the coda:

All: Jesus, Jesus, Jesus and Me! (2 claps)

Since Amy set the original tempo, she sets the new one as well, but everyone will kind of find it naturally as you progress.

All: Me and Jesus

Amy: We’re eating lumpia

All: Me and Jesus

Brenda: pulling clothes out of the dryer

All: …..

The pattern repeats until they fall down.

JUN 20 2015
LEAVE A COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
MY MONOLOGUE, MY MONOLOGUE

Forward: It helps if you already know the shortform game My Movie, My Movie, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RWlsFZfGus4

My Monologue, My Monologue is an overly complex game that is meant to accomplish one thing, teach you how to properly deliver premines, pulled from source material, in a clear and concise manner.  If you don’t want to go down a premise path with your character work, that is fine, skip this.

Every game is just Pattern(s) and Restriction(s) of said Pattern(s), so I will explain in steps.  Examples will be given after the entire cycle is laid out.

Step 1)

Starting position:

Player 1

Player2 Player3 Player4 Player5…PlayerN

Player1 (chosen at random) delivers a character monologue, (no more than 1:30 please)

Step 2

In no set order the players on the line (Player2 -PlayerN) deliver a scene start that delivers an exact duplicate of some aspect of the monologue.

Player 1 will either decide a scene initiation is clear enough to be obvious where it was pulled from and what the base reality is intended to be and say yes, or if not say no and someone else gives their scene initiation.

Step 3

The player selected will then come out into the Player 1 position, which we will now call the Premise Person. The monologist will rejoin the line.  Our new Premise Person will deliver the scene start over and over again until someone on the line feels they understand enough to jump in and be that character, delivering the exact same scene start until the Premise Person decides they have it.  This position will be called Scene Member 1.  Another random person from the line should jump in and take another, new character to play the scene out with, who we will call Scene Member 2.

Stage position will now look like this:

Scene Member 1        Scene Member 2

Premise Person

Player 3, Player 4….PlayerN

Step 4)

Scene Member 1 and Scene Member 2 now act out the scene based on the scene start provided and after each new line or piece of info given by Scene Member 1, the Premise Person will either accept that this would be the reality of the world their scene start inspired or call that they are inventing and correct as a director might.

Scenes can be any length but I like :45-1:00 scenes.

Step 5)

Scene Member 2 and the Premise Person return to the line and Scene Member 1 now becomes PLayer one and we return to the original set up described in step 1.

Break before example:

Whew….That seems like an awful lot doesn’t.  Also, given that so much of it is subjective, how on earth do we know if we are doing it right?  Great question.  I think that if we have based our characters and work in truth of the obvious and observable, we can see what is clearly discovered or invented based on how it is regarded and how characters react.  This is not a cut and dry science, this is art after all.  Your experience will vary.

Example of the game.

Let’s name some characters

Adam, Becky, Charles, Dana and Elvis.

Step 1)

They set up to look like this:

Adam

Becky, Charles, Dana, Elvis

Adam delivers an angry monologue about how traffic makes him mad and it’s too hot in summer these days.

Step 2:

Becky goes first and volunteers, she is an old lady angry at birds cause there are more than there used to be.

Adam says no

Elvis plays a character who is nervous and isn’t sure that the weather is ever going to be good again.

Adam says no

Dana delivers a trippy hippy character saying the line from the monologue “Like why can’t people just drive ,like good.”

Adam says YES! Adam’s judgement here is that the premise that Dana wants to play is crystal clear and would result in a solid base realty almost immediately

Step 3:

Dana takes the Premise Person position and delivers the exact same scene opening with the same line the same way a few times.  On the third pass, Charles jumps out and delivers it as an exact mirror.  After 2 times through Dana says he has it and steps to the right position, as seen in the chart above, becoming Scene Member 1.

Becky moves forward to assume the Scene Member 2 role.

Step 4:

Charles and Becky do the scene and it continues until the 4th line Charles delivers which is about ‘just getting along’ This strikes Dana as weird and she gives a direction to Charles to move away from the positive vibes, but stay hippy voiced.

After a few more lines we are all in agreement the idea is established and the world is fleshed out enough, we end the scene

Step 5:

Becky and Dana return to the line and Charles stays behind to deliver another character monologue, which will take us back to step 1.

NOTE: This is a made up contrived example.  Sometimes it will go this smooth, sometimes every line of dialogue will get corrected.

Yes this is overly complex, but having so many little moving pieces means you can’t be in your head about the other things I think.  After everyone has played the role of Premise Person several times, it should become clearer to each one what makes a good scene start for delivering a premise pulled from source material should look like.

JUN 13 2015
1 COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
PHYSICALITY- PART 1 FEET AND SPINE POSITION AS THE BASIS OF ALL CHARACTER

The first of the 3 things I use to define character is Physicality.  If I had to sum it up in one sentence it would be ‘posture leads to all physical traits.’ If you already know what that means, then skip this post, nothing new or exciting here.

We have only one thing to show the audience in an improv show.  That is ourselves.

Our physical bodies.

I believe that all physical differences between the normal neutral you and the characters you are playing can be attributed to 2 main factors.

1) how we place our feet

and

2) how we hold our spines.

But what about arms and hands and neck and head and face and knees and all those other things?  They are not going away but how they attach to the spine and feet are always going to determine how they are positioned.  Any modification to the feet and spine are going to cause literally everything else to

Try this for yourself right now.  Stand up and feel how your spine and feet are naturally.  I highly suggest walking around a bit to find this but it is optional.  Once you are 100% sure that it is really you (as Misner would say) try making a slight change to your feet and how your spine is shaped.  What do you notice?  How do your hands lay against your body akimbo?  How do your knees feel and where is your chest positioned over them?  The most important  one for me (and one I will spend an entire post on in the future) is how does this affect your breathing?

Now change again slightly and ask those same questions.  And again.

What I am positive is going to be fundamentally true, no matter how slight, is that each new foot position and sine alignment is going to produce real physical and therefore observable changes.

This is the starting place for the truth of any character.  And that is what I firmly believe we are after.  That is what the audience desperately wants.  That is what they will pay money to see.  Honest truth.

Postscript:

Why is this useful?  As a performer I am always struggling to get out of my head.  I want to simplify as much as possible to make things easy.  To make room for my brain to just react rather than worry about what to say next or how to advance the scene, I need basic ‘go to’ things that I know work every time no matter what the situation.  Every character needs to have their feet be somewhere and spine be somewhere, so this is something simple to give my thinking brain to do when I step off the line.

As a bonus on this I find I surprise myself more often than not by just jumping out and taking a new stance.

Some footnotes:

There are even exceptions to this such as a Bat, using puppets or a voiceover piece, I suppose.  But even then, you are still reliant on your body to produce your voice, so this is always going to be true.

Go watch any archetypical character.  Cheney’s Frankenstein monster, Bogart’s hard boiled detectives, or Chaplin’s tramp and look at what makes them what they are.  Frankenstein’s monster is very rigid and the tramp is always a little bit of a slouch.  Detectives are always a bit on edge and Pauly Shore is always too relaxed.  I would be willing to bet if you reduced their characters down to just footprints and just lines tracing their backs and how they stood you could tell one from another.

In the every day world we know this is provable true.  Go sit in a coffee shop and watch the people walk by and focus on how their feet hit the ground and how their shoulders are positioned over their feet.  This is at the core of how we identify people without seeing their faces.

If you know how a character breathes you know everything there is to know about them from a physical discovery aspect. Not what we think is true or what we can invent for them, but what is actually obsrvably true about these characters.

JUN 07 2015
LEAVE A COMMENT
UNCATEGORIZED
EDIT
MAJOR IDEAS I WILL EXPLORE NEXT

Character:

All characters can be distilled into 3 main points:

1 – Physicality (posture leads to all physical traits)

2 – Emotional state of being (That character in that moment in time)

3 – Worldview (perspective that is immutable)

Exercises to include “Piss Creek”, “My Monologue, My Monologue.” “Port Key”, “This is how I breath, this is how I breath”,

Game

Pattern and Restriction

Everthing is a game, Making up games, pulling game as a premise,

warm up games:

Me and Jesus, Turtle time career, screaming numbers, dirtbikes, Non-sequitor (with and without justifications).

This will get me started, no time line on this stuff.  Just do it as I can.  When I get a clean final, likely going to publish to WP.

Dwayne