Andrew and 
Mike McDermmit

Site Maintenance – Best Practices for Keeping Your Site Up and Running
Andrew Walker, Mike McDermott
Automattic moderating

The web is not static

I wear a belt, but you guys are my suspenders - On backups in WP.

If you are paying for your hosting with jelly beans you are going to get what you pay for.  

No one can contact you if your website is down

Jetpack Monitor - email you if you are down


Afternoon Keynote: Building an Open Source Agency
Brad Griffith
7 or 8 freelancers in room that hold 100

Background JPMorgan Chase
Slow, dev complex 

Flexibility Ambition Impatience High risk tolerance

"Healthy disregard for the impossible"
ups and downs, weather the storm

WHy not:
Expertise
Billing Rate
Predictability

I asked how many had heard of TED, no one raised their hand, I felt like leaving the room immediately

Values are critical, OSS problems are value based problems
Total predicatabilty and lack of bugs are different than OSS

OSS Values:
Abundance - opposite of scarcity - not everyone is the right fit for your company
Vulnerability - 
Initiative

Pricing, say no sooner
disqualify
follow up, follow up, follow up
Clients pay for your LAST project
you need to lose 25% of your prospects to price or you are underpriced.
start somewhere, 
Under pricing your service makes you look less valuable to your clinets
You are more sensitive to price than your customers
Price of gas vs salt $1.99 
People spend a lot of attention and time on gas
rarely buy salt, no idea what i should cost.

Scope - Tie the scope down. Who will pay for it?

Expectation management
Deliver bad news
"we can do that" vs "We are going to do that"
Juxtapose complexity and Expertise.
JUST BE HONEST
they will respect you for telling them and being upfront
How people treat you when you deliver bad news it is indicative of how they will treat you later in the process.

Focus on Values!!!

Security issue objection - acknowledge - but you rather have a single company or time tested open comnity process to fix security.  

Pricing? When do you increase for existing clients
The right clients will respect increases over reasonable time
bad clients you want to raise prices even faster. They will say "I can get it done a $ cheaper and cost you a lot more money in the lng run.


Never Sell a Site Without a Maintenance Agreement
Mike McDermott

70% of top 1Millon WP websites could be hacked at any time (security vulnerable).
Hackers are not attacking you, they are attaching everyone.  Every site.

Why is it important to have maintenance?
Security
Functionality 
Compatibility

90% uptime  = 33 days a year down

Why provide Maintenance 
Look to what you are really good at.

Without maint, I have no reason at all to talk to client unless hosting billing
With - additional conversation that 'things are doing great' then upsell
proves your worth to get more work done
exchanging income for peace of mind

What is in a maint. agreement?
More than you think.
Offsite backups
SIte and Server monitoring
Minor Site Updates (Labor and new design work) get creative.
Server Maintenance (labor)

How much to charge for maint. agreement? 
Tools costs
Security remediation
helpdesk ticketing
recurring billing software
SPam filter enhancements
Webb hosting and server maintenance

Who can you sell WP Maint. plans to?
Current Clients
Past Clients
Those Not Even YOUR Clients

those spam Emails about SEO will get you a chance to talk to the site owners who don't understand them and let you explain it, explain how you already made those optimizations and optimized where you actually can.  


Version Control Your Site: Tracking ALL Website Changes
Dustin Hartzler

THings you need
Hosting acocunt
Local version of site (ServerPress is wht he uses)
Git
DeployHQ.com account
MigrateDBPro (optional)

Step 1 Pull down a copy of site t local
2: edit
3: Same everything with Git
4: DeployHQ.com
5: Push DB changes to server with MIgrate DB Pro

The local or dev site is there for you to make structural changes to your site.  