
The time I went to Iceland and it snowed a lot.  

I trudged though 51cm (20.07 inches) of snowfall to make it to Sunday sessions of Iceland's first ever DrupalCamp Northern Lights (#DCNLights).  I had to walk down the middle of the unplowed Reykavjik streets, still dark at 8:00am  because the sidewalk and all the cars were covered in the most snow in a single night since 1937.  I was the first to the venue and was glad for that fact. It gave me time to dry my socks in the restroom without witnesses.  Baddy, our organizer, soon arrived. She said we were going to plan Z, which was not too concerning since the Icelandic alphabet has 3 additional letters than English.   
http://icelandmonitor.mbl.is/news/news/2017/02/26/record_amount_of_snowfall_for_february_in_reykjavik/

Let's back up a few steps.  

I was really excited to have my talk "We are making all of this up: Improv lessons for the developer" LINK accepted to this camp.  This was out of market for where I had been focusing my session submissions and I was pleasantly surprised I was accepted after seeing the caliber of the other speakers on the schedule.  I am very grateful to my company and management for giving me the chance to attend and develop myself.  I have been to Iceland before so, this was not intended to be a sightseeing vacation, but instead a chance to learn what the larger Drupal world outside of the US had been up to.  What transpired truly transcended either of these goals making #DCNLights a unique experience, which with I am not sure any other event can quite compete. 

Iceland is an 8 hour ride from my home in San Francisco and an 8 hour time difference.  Taking off Thursday at noon PST put me on the ground Friday at 4:00am UTC.  Keflavík airport is approximately 50 minutes from Reykjavik and all the needed transportation to the awesome Galaxy Pod Hostel meant I got to bed at about 5:45am.
I was greeted with the worst weather Iceland has seen all year.  This caused havoc with the initial and then subsequent plans.  Fortunately, as we discovered, the Icelandic way is to have backup plans to backup plans and this spirit of rolling with the punches the island throws really made this event amazing.  

The Food and the Fun:
Plan A had consisted of all the speakers and attendees who could arrive on Friday to go on a Golden Circle tour, paid for by the largest organization to use Drupal in Oceland, the National Power Company.  We were even going to tour their completely sustainable renewable energy plant that leverages Iceland's geothermal properties.  We were to end the day with a reception thrown by the mayor of Reykavjik.  Due to the storm though, this plan was scrapped by the time I was on the airplane, as the tour bus would not be able to navigate the icy roads.  

Plan B was to go for a city walking tour in the morning, maybe some ice skating donated by the city rink and finally the the mayors reception.  The rain and wind destroyed this plan as well by the time I woke up at 9:30am.  Honestly I was a bit grateful to get a few more hours of sleep.  

Plan C was to just meet for Ice Skating and then to the mayors.  I valiantly attempted the 1km walk from my hostel to the rink but the sidewalks were a mess of ice and sluch and the sleet was being whipped by the wind into my eyes, so I opted to get some work done and just go meet the mayor later.  The #DCNLights channel on the Drupal slack told me that people were pre-partying for the mayor at American Bar.  Geven I had not eaten a proper meal since I arrived I made the journey across town to eat ribs at a place that specialized in my country's cuisine.  It was awesome to see familiar faces in this land of ice and snow so far from my home.  I was greeted as an old friend by all the drupalers, even ones I didn't yet know. 

Plan D kicked in when we showed up to the mayors office and found that he was not able to attend due to other responsibilities.  Instead he sent us a member of the pirate party, city council member NAME OF THE GUY, who gave one of the best speeches I have ever hear from outside of our community on the importance of open source.  "Drupal is free as in beer, which is something Icelanders like.  But it is also free in another way that Icelanders also feel strongly about, transparency and commitment to community'.  We were given very nice beer and wine and hor d'ourves reflecting the local culinary pallet.  

Plan D also had a reserved room awaiting us in a bar atop a hotel where I learned many afterparties have been thrown for the national opera and symphony, which is only a few blocks away.  Aside from a helicopter ride I can't imagine a better perspective on seeing the city lit up in the cold northern dark.   

The final piece of Plan D was the wonderful surprise that all the Saturday sessions had been reorganized and we were still going on the sightseeing trip, minus the power plant tour.  Capping the first night was a local rock band at a coffee shop and a late night hot dog with fried onions and brown mustard.  If there is a better way to serve a hot dog I have not encountered it.  

Saturday brought a snowstorm that started when I was a block from my hostel and ended when I was a block from the venue, a 3km walk.  I was completely white with snow build up when I arrived at the University of Iceland's Oddi School of Business.  I was not the only one.  My orignal plan had time scheduled for stopping to get coffee, but the slipperiness of the sidewalks and the windy route that google maps suggested put me at the venue just in time for the opening remarks.  

Lunch was served at the Vue Television station cefeteria and was a traditional preserved whitefish lunch.  The Drupal Viking told us all that this exact menu on a Saturday for his entire life has been more reliable than the sun coming up.  We were very well fed and then got a quick tour and heard an awesome presentation (detailed below). 

We then boarded 2 very large tour busses and away we went to see the contental divide, which is the original location of parlament. An Icelandic flag marks where the Speaker of the Law would have to stand to deliver the rule to the people a millennia ago.  

It snowed on us the entire time we were off the bus but immediatly cleared to a beautiful day as we continued on towards the geysers.  We stopped for about an hour at some of the most beautiful waterfalls I have ever seen.  
Again, it snowed almost the entire time we were off the bus and the clouds parted as soon as the bus wheel moved.  

The next stop was the original Iclandic Gysir, where we get the word geyser from.  (FACT CHECK THIS).  Geothermal hot springs contain a large amount of sulfur.  This means that all the hot water in the country, including these 95deg (Celsius) and hotter pools and eruptions smelled terrible and tinted the landscape a yellowish brown.  


As the sun set we found our way to a place that specializes in artificial light, an organic green house tomato farm.  Iceland offers some of the world's cheapest energy and they were putting it to good use at PLACE NAME HERE.  1 ton of tomatos per day are produced in this facility that is in constant sunlight using hydroponics and imported bumblebees.  The meal was a fresh tomato soup and if all tomato soup tasted like that I would be eating a lot more of it.  It was served with very hearty breads and coffee or tea.  I capped my meal off with some tomato ice cream with tomato based toppings. We were scheduled to stay for a much longer time to enjoy the facility and the adjacent horse farm, but again the snow had started and the drivers where concerned with road conditions.  
Arriving back in the city at around 11:00pm made me decide to call it a night and I walked home with the largest snowflakes I maybe have ever seen floating down.  

Sunday morning I awoke to the record snows and a city infrastructure overwhelmed with the historic accumulation. Having traveled as far as I ha,d and connecting so strongly with my peers, I was determined to make it to the event.  Most of the way I was able to walk in the middle of the street in the tire tracks left from the few cars that did manage to stay mobile overnight.  The snow ceased as I walked but I kicked up a small blizzard in my trouncing though knee high snow drifts on the unshoveled paths of the university campus.  It was incredible to be alone with so much snow and the rising sun.  

Plan D had to be abandoned since the unexpected blizzard made it impossible for most attendees to make it on time.  So we went with Plan Z.  A newly jostled schedule that allowed the coffee people some extra time to arrive, a late start time and slightly shorter sessions with no breaks between.  Fortunately lunch was served by the university cafeteria.  The school's buildings are all connected by underground tunnels and we didn't even have to put our coats back on to comfortably stroll to lunch. We had Lasagna, salad and what I assume were vegetable protein potato nuggets.  Whatever they where, they were delicious with the sweet chili sauce they served.  

Plan Z also included another surprise, an expedition that night to go to try and see the northern lights.  Again paid for by the conference and free to attend.  Unfortunately nature did not cooperate with us and we had to return to town and say our goodbyes without having experienced the Aurora Boreales, but the joy of being together and seeing the vividly clear stars in the freezing night sky made the trip worth every second.  By happenstance the returning bus route drove directly in front of my hostel and I wasn't able to say goodbye to everyone in the commotion of departing.  It sure was nice not having to walk further in the snow on uneven icy ground as I had done previous nights.     
 

The Sessions
Day one had 3 sessions. 1 of which was delivered at Ruv, the Icelandic TV station.  
Baddy and Hnrinn, our camp organizers, kicked things off with a slide showing all the different countries who were represented.  This immediately set this camp apart from almost any other event I have ever attended aside from maybe DrupalCon Barcelona.  We celebrated our diversity right from the start and it carried through until the last goodbyes.   

The Keynote:
Joanna from Amazee.io gave us a very good insight into how she came into the Drupal space, not from a development perspective but, like me, from a business one.  Her revelation that these agency owners openly shared their trade secrets went against everything she had thought was necessary to maintain a competitive advanage.  She soon discovred that this was a real cooperative agvantage in this community of people that were building the very tool they were basing their businesses on.  She said the thing that made this community work was our string ethics, guided by our code of conduct.  I have never heard this point articulated better and it really set the tone for the rest of our time together in sessions and in hallway conversations.  

The theme of cooperation really shone though the next session of the day. Allison Mannley delivered a brilliant talk on the kickoff meeting with a client.  Clear and easy to follow, she laid out the steps they take at Palantir to set expectations and deliver projects. She really focused on how to communicate clearly with multiple stakeholders to be able to get the best results on sometimes very complex matters.  Some solid takeaways for all folks working on client facing teams.  

The third session was delivered by the developer at Ruv who had implemented Drupal 6, which had replaced a proprietary and outdated CMS.  Rather than just laying out the technical specs of what they had done the presentation really highlighted the journy the team had taken to get to success.  We all shared their pain as he recounted that on the initial launch day, with the VP of the network standing behind the Drupal Viking, they had to try and restart apache servers and inadvertently caused a crash.  But they persisted and now are one of the largest companies in Iceland to use Drupal.  It was a real treat a a DrupalCamp to hear these types of stories from an internal development perspective as opposed to an agency delivery one. 

Day 2 had too many awesome talks to write about them all.  The augmented schedule and some  actually prevented me from seeing everything I wanted to see but what I saw was awesome.  In the interest of content length I am only going to write about 4

Mike's talk on design blew me away.  The biggest take away was that 'if you design for average, you design for no one.'  He told the story of the airforce having a failing jet program due to user issues and not being able to sort out why.  It wasn't until engineers focused on the extreme size difference between the tallest pilots and the shortest ones that they came up with adjustable seats and the user issues were greatly reduced.  By focusing on the limitations and designing for that, we can expect to have better results for everyone.  http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/technical/semantic_markup.shtml

Jonnes brilliant talk on 'The Wunder Process' was uplifting and invigorating.  Starting with the concept of 'the whole is greater than the sum of it's parts' thinking, Wunder believes that small process improvements, no matter how marginal, add up to large improvements.  They mirrors Toyotas continual process improvement mechanisms.  He said Toyota gets about a million process improvement suggestions from employees per year and nearly 90% are implemented.  The results are a much more efficient overall machine.  Focus on the parts of the process and you will get the larger goals you are working towards.  

My session went over well and I am very proud to say it was the most international crowd to which I have ever spoken.  10 people in the room represented 6 different nationalities and all sorts of backgrounds.  Some of my humor fell a little flat I think due to language and poplar culture limitations across borders.  It was a good reminder to me that not everyone has seen as much American television as I have.  The crowd went along with my rather strange requests to actually do some improv exercises.  Compounding the awkwardness for the exercises was the fact almost no one participating natively spoke the same language.  Still, we managed to end up with many smiles and new techniques to break the ice for teams and to engage with clients in a fun yet meaningful way.  

Wes brought us into the world of VR and showed me for the first time, the possibilities of WebVR.  While I was nominally familiar with the concept of virtual reality over the internet it wasn't until this talk that the development side of that work came into focus.  He showed us his code for some pretty interesting demos of VR using A-FRAME. a Mozilla project with some very straightforward notation.  Next time the conversation of 'what do we do as a CMS after websites' comes up, I will have some very handy facts to cite.  

Jim Birch ended the planned sessions on Sunday with about a workshop an a half forth of SEO tips and tricks delivered in just over 35 minutes.  A literal blur of information was delivered and as you can see from his slides, dozens of links were shared that each needs its own exploration and study.  Wholistic SEO is not something I spend too much of my time thinking on, but I walked away with some realizations and some next steps to improve my own small projects.  

Baddy and Hrinn wrapped up the last session and we celebrated making this camp happen.  They said when they first planned this, in their minds maybe 30 people would attend.  In the end 97 people from 24 different countries assembled and bonded over the worst snow in many years, the freezing cold and our renewed sense of purpose that we are in fact creating something bigger than the sum of the parts.  Namely Drupal.  
Currently there is no plan to have a DrupalCamp Northern Lights 2018.  It is a good thing that #DCNLights 2016 was enough fun for multiple years!  

