I made WordPress Marketing happen
Did you know Wordpress has a marketing community?
https://make.wordpress.org/marketing/
It is new
It is fun
It is important


Having a competitor (BlueHost) admit they were ripping my strategy off
:)

Setting up my booth by myself sucked

WordCamp Atlanta: Cold days in Hotlanta and finding gold
Atlanta was experiencing a cold spell when I got there.  about 15 degrees colder than my beloved SF.  I had last been to ATL in the late summer of 2004 when I was working for the American Red Cross as a disaster relief worker the year before Hurricane Katrina. Most folks don't recall but there were five hurricanes that swept Florida that year.  My unit dropped into Atlanta to stage for the clean up efforts.  Very fortunately for me this time, there was no emergency to deal with, just the fun, fellowship and learnings from the awesome presenters at WordCamp Atlanta 2017.

The camp fell on the St. Patrick's Day weekend and shamrocks, lepricons, rainbows, and pots of gold were prominent in the theme.  650 people in total gathered at the CENTER to get our WP on. I was especially excited to be going to Atlanta because I was able to fill a gap in the speaker schedule created by a last minute change.  I absolutely LOVE contributing at camps and leveraging my public speaking skills.  I was lucky enough to get to contribute this and some other ways.    

Unlike any other WordCamp I had attended, the day long beginner sessions (Site Building, Developing and Designing) as well as Contributor Day fell on the Friday, before the regular days of sessions.  I have to say I really liked this arrangement.  Instead of being exhausted and having nagging 'day job work' piled up over the previous days, I felt energized by seeing my peers that morning without the normal rush of responsibilities representing Pantheon brings at camp.  I was able to warm up with some socializing and then roll up my sleves to give full attention and focus to the task at hand.

I was thrilled to learn there was a new community contribution project around marketing WP.  In the past I have contributed (ever so slightly) to docs.  I had originally dipped my toes in the contrib waters back at WordCamp US with the docs team for 2 reasons.  First because I think good docs are the cornerstone of successful open source projects.  And on a more personal level it was something I thought I could realistically do as I am not a great PHP developer.  However, if I am being totally honest, it is not something I felt super passionate about.  Getting other people excited about an idea and pushing a view into the world on the other hand sounds extremely exciting and something I really look forward to participating in moving forward.
If you have not gone to a contributor day yet or visited make.wordpress.org please consider it.  We are litrally all responsible for the future of WordPress (and Drupal for that matter).
I was also excited about this team because of who was leading the charge on that Friday, the talented Jason and Bridget from GiveWP.  You can go read the mission statement and all the current details about the Marketing team here (MAKE.WP.Org/Markting) 
I worked with Jason to draft and then execute on some market research at the camp with developers giving quick and useful feedback that will help us moving ahead.  It is the early days of this new initiative and I am super excited to be a pert of this effort moving forward.

Saturday brought a flood of people, 650 in total to the LEADLEDER CENTER in Atlanta.  Bringing much energy to the event were the 40 kids that came for KidsCamp.  It was super exciting to see a group of youngsters excited to be part of our webdev world.  Lead by the super talented Shelly/Sarah??? she broke the kids into 3 groups, beginners who would build their first WordPress.com site. Intermediate, who would build and work on their first real WordPress site and Advanced where they cracked open the hood and learned some PHP for theming and plugin development.  I am very excited for the future of WP.  I was 22 when WordPress 1.0 dropped.  These kids were all born after 2.0 and have never realistically known a world without PHP 5.3.  I can only imagine what they will dream up that will become the next generation of application and internet experience.  

The Food and the Fun
Friday moring brought coffee and a few pastries.  Being in the home of Waffle House and since there was one on the walk to the venue, I decided to get breakfast there.  So I didn't try any of the pastries.  Lunch however was prettty great kale salad and buffalo chicken wraps.  As it was Contributor day it was really a working lunch, which is something that felt pretty natural given it was a Friday.  
Friday night was the Speaker/Sponsor dinner was at the historic CocaCola Northlands Gahtering Spot.  There was a cash bar and all you can eat buffet of pecan encrusted chicken with green beans, potatoes and wedge salad.  Admittedly I went back for 2nds of the chicken as it was sweet and savory all at once.  Delightful. All too soon it was time to get some rest and prep for the Saturday morning rush of setup and kicking off a day of camp. 
Sturday lunch was a variation on the smae from Friday.  The Louderman(CENTER) team does a pretty good job of catering.  Normally I am not a fan of kale, but their cooks did it up right.  
We returned to the Gathering Spot for the main after party.  We were treated to pretty amazing chicken and waffle appetizers, served with syrup thick with roasted pecans, spring rolls, gaspacho and rare stake bruschetta. All elegantly served by a very hospitable and kind staff.  Hospitality in the south is renown and I was not disappointed by my experience here.  
Then the after-after party where we were to sing some #WCKaraoke tried to get going at the Metro Diner.  Normally this 24 hour diner/bar has karaoke nightly from 8:30 to 2:30, but due to an emergency maintence it was shutting down at 10:30 and no Karaoke offered.  Very luckily @TheKyrk stepped up to find an alternative and we rerouted to the Midtown Tavern.  A very spacious bar that was hopping on a Saturday night.  There was a huge turnout for a #WCKaraoke event, spurned on by our collective desire to sing together and to not be outdone by the folks at WordCamp London which had their #WCKaraoke event a number of hours before.  Even Troy Dean, our keynote speaker (and one of the nicest human beings I have ever met) came out to lift his voice in collective song.    
ALEXANDER's TWEET

vs

TroyDean/SpinBird pic

Sunday morning came all too soon and I again indulged in Waffle House.  There is just something about those hasbrowns scattered, capped and peppered that is irresistible to me and I am very glad there is not one near me in SF.  Saturday lunch again brought yummy wraps and the joy of hanging out with campers while they ate.  There is something primally satisfying about eating together.  Always glad to eat with my fellow WordPress people.  


The Sessions
The Keynote
Troy Dean flew all the way from Australia to deliver one of the most inspirational Keynotes I have heard yet.  He told us of his transformation from a broke and depressed nearly homeless man to living a very rich life by focusing on helping people.  My biggest take away was something he said rather early on.  .................

My session
I am grateful to again have had the chance to deliver my We Are All Making This Up, Improv Lessions for Developers talk at camp.  This was the first time I had repeat audience members as well and their feedback was really helpful.  I am refining this talk as time goes on and am very much looking forward to giving it again in Chicago for MidCamp and again in Raleigh next month as well as for a much larger audience very soon (CAN I ACCOUNCE YET?  No, not likely). My only regret about giving this talk is that it meant I could not see Mr. talk about the WP-CLI. I am slated to give a similar session in San Diego and was hoping to see him in action, as my slides are very much based on his.  Fortunately in the long run we can all see his talk on WordPress.tv

Brian's Session
Carl's Session
Bridget's Session

