https://www.mcdwayne.com/2017/05/03/10-days-on-the-road-some-meta-thoughts/ https://www.mcdwayne.com/2017/05/03/wordcamp-chicago-2017/ https://www.mcdwayne.com/2017/05/03/drupalcon2017/ https://www.mcdwayne.com/2017/05/03/wcraleigh/



10 days on the road: some meta thoughts about Raleigh, Baltimore, and Chicago.

REMINDER: EMAIL WPMARKETING NEW CAMPER BUDDY SYSTEM IDEA!

I have grown accustomed to, and perhaps even fond of, traveling on a near weekly basis, all of my prior trips have allowed me a reset and return to my beloved San Francisco in between destinations.  This trips was the first time I had traveled directly from one destination to the next in direct succession.  This proved rather exhausting but at the same time exhilarating and strangely satisfying.  I sit here and find myself surprised and confused by the complexity of what I have felt over the course of this journey.  

I wanted to follow the general "overview/food and fun/sessions" model the other posts on this site take with regard to the three cities I got to visit, but given that there are 3 such posts that cover those aspects, I thought a meta post was in order about the totality of the experience of this one.

Before I do that though I would like to clear the air about something and that is the intended audience for these posts.  
That audience is me.  Specifically future me.    
The fact that you are reading this delights me, but this is a bit of a joyous happenstance rather than a deliberate intention.  I thought it might be a good idea to take a moment to first thank you and then to give you a tad more context for this entire writing project. This is also some rationalizing not following SEO length best practices and just getting all the details as verbose as I care to.  

So, thank you for reading.  

Now, to elaborate on my content goals, I started traveling 'for reals' over a year ago in the Spring of 2016 and immediately fell in love with the lifestyle.  The miles, the unpredictablity, the family that is the other road dogs of the communities.  All of it.  I got to the end of 2016 though, returned from WordCamp US and had a few weeks to breath and reflect.  I had been keeping a list, which is the oldest blog post on this site, of all the cities I had seen on my trips, but I was hard pressed to remember exactly who I had met where or what I had done at each place.  20{{FACT CHECK!!!}} destinations that had all become a big ball of mud (link to the Brian Foote paper) in my memory.  
That is why I started writing.  To remind myself of the facts I thought were the most important to reflect on.  Where I learned what and what party was which.  And here I am today sharing it with you. 
End explanation.

There are a few meta things that don't fit 'the formula' exactly, but are critical to the overall journey, so I am going to encapsulate them as best I can in this post. 

Biggest thing that was different going into this trip is that I turned vegan.  Yep, I did. I have been debating with myself on if I should write about this or not.  I want to be transparent and open here, with the hope that when I do reread this one day I will recall why I made the decision to not bring it up outside of this particular post.  
It was not for health reasons, or directly for environmental reasons, or for the kindness to animals part, or even for the girlfriend, though she did tip the scale a bit.  It is really because of two main factors.  
The first reason is the one that was tipped over the edge by the girlfriend who is vegan.  I really liked her from the first date and wanted to be accommodating of her food choices by taking her to places where she could order anything on the menu.  In pretty short order I realized that there is an awesome plant based foodie movement that is well underway.  Once I saw the sheer creativity and amazing quality of entres, meat as the star of the meal just seems lazy.  It is one of those things that you can't unsee.  With over 100 (((CHECK THIS FACT!!)) type of vegetable available at pretty much any market the situation is something like 90% of a traditional restaurant menu being some variation of 'slices of animal with a starch and one or two options of veggies'.  I have not eaten as good, novel and varied foods as I have since I made this plunge.
The second reason is actually indirectly because of Chris Lema's brilliant talk "What got you here will not get you there".  I grew up a Trekkie.  ST:TNG and ST:V were my jam.  That future is vegan.  There is even an episode about it where they don't allow a planet into the federation because they still used animals for food.  Once I saw why we eat meat from a nutritional perspective, synthesizing protein and fats for consumption, this just seemed hella arcane.  This is literally a pre-agricultural society concept.  Now, I do recognize that there is a ton of privilege in that statement. If I had to source all my own calories, I would likely raise animals to do it too.  I am highly fotunate to have a life that allows me to think in such abstractions.  But back to the point here, if we want to get to the point we can travel the stars, well maybe we better start forcusing on how to synthesize protein and fat in new ways.  After all, if we are far from this rock and all we have is a fusion reactor to power us, we are not going to be wasting resources on cows, pigs, or any other animals for food.  Right now it is 100% possible to get all our nutrition from plants but not nearly as affordable since the food industry and supply systems are not set up to support this yet.  This is why I am taking the plunge intellectually.  To get the quality and availability of these foods advanced as far and as fast as I can.  Voting with my dollars towards this kind of future where a machine on a wall spits out foods that do not yet exist that will delight our pallats in ways our ancestors couldn't dream up and readily available to anyone who is hungry.

Next up, sleep is not the goal, at least not for me.  I find myself coaxing a good number of people into joining the networking events I attend.  Most of these events take place as the form of parties at drinking establishments.  I meet a fair amount of resistance with the rationale that 'sleep is important' and 'that is too late for tonight.'  I catch myself saying things like "I am not going to wish I had gone to bed earlier when I die" or "IF you are not exhausted, how do you know you tried your best?' to a lot of people.  
Yes, I get tired.  Yes there is a price to be paid for this approach to living.  Yes, I am having an amazing time.  I want everyone to feel the same satisfaction I do when a late night party turns into a friendship. Or when 'just one more round' turns into a serious business discussion with a 'win-win' solidly identified because of a personal trust that gets forged as the night flames with fire.  I am at a loss for how to better communicate this though. I do fully recognize that this type of life is not feasible to some folks and fear alienating those who I do encourage to join the party.  

What I have learned along the way.  While I write about the various sessions I attend I rarely write about the impact that absorbing this much knowledge has been having on me as a human being.  I am ultra privileged to attend the breath of conference and camps that I do.  I have attended and taken many notes at talks that varied from Symfony Framework tooling to how to be a better freelancer.  Why accessibility matters to mental health best practices.  How to write a theme to how to build a designation website.  How important security really is to the internet to hot dish vs casserole.  My brain feels like it has grown in size over the last year and my frame of reference for the entire web industry has broadened immensely.  I rarely stop to think about the sum total of what I have learned, but occasionally I have these little epiphanies that I can do things now that even just a few months ago I would have been hard pressed to attempt.  Things like answering questions around CLI use for a CMS.  Things like configuring DNS to prevent search engines from indexing duplicate content (which kills SEO btw). Things like giving advice on how to write a session on mental health using PHP versioning language.  I am overwhelmed, even to the point of finding myself rather emotional at times, at the amazingness of this sitation I am in.  Of the rare opportunity I have been granted by circumstance and the fates and by amazing people who believe in me.  I can't thank them enough.  I do my best to stay grateful.  

Whew.  That felt really good to get off my chest.  All of it.  I had been stewing those thoughts as I formulated the other posts and I am very glad to have captured them here.  
 
Thanks again for reading and sharing my journey.  Let me get you back to the regularly scheduled program.  Here are the links for the three cities in the normal format and order:
 1) WordCamp Raleigh:  
 2) DrupalCon Baltimore: The big show and blowing peoples minds
 3) WordCamp Chicago: Rain in the windy city but sunshine in our hearts
 
 