There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact. -Arthur Conan Doyle

-> Theater:

All too often I see beginner improvisors spend the first seconds of a scene milling around the stage and awaiting something interesting to be said or done by another player so they can react and 'find the scene'.  They literally wait 5+ seconds into the set to begin their scene once they feel they have 'discovered' what is it about.  We too often see one of the characters 'drop' their initial character choices to 'better' serve what they think their scene partner wants.  This is mainly a problem because the audience has been accepting the reality presented to them up til then as the real scene.  We lose them when their expectations are not met with honoring what is already there.  The best scenes and the better audience experience starts at 'lights up', not after a few lines are delivered.

Let's imagine a scene that starts with the lights coming up with two people on stage and ane person looking looking out and focusing on something in the distance while looking very concerned. And let's imagine there is also a second player who is miming pushing a large, heavy object.  Upon noticing the second player, our first actor completely drops what they were doing and rushes over to help push this object as well.   The audience is left to wonder 'what the heck was she looking at?' and 'why isn't the other player concerned?'  Completely valid questions we can hope our players will answer in the course of the scene. But if this basic anticipation is not met with an answer it causes a certain distress in the audience.  All too often players just drop these first fragments of information since the players felt the scene didn't 'really start' until they were both pushing the rock.  If instead we had both characters really hang onto their first choices we can explore the entire world that is created in the first seconds the audience witnesses.

Reality is that the audience has a lot more knowledge about what is actually happening on stage than you do as the actor.  They see all and expect to have their expectations from those first few moments recognized and appreciated.  The best results are from recognizing, with an extreme alertness, everything that is going on in their field of vision: foot positions, breathing patterns and even where everyone's eyes are focused.  If it happens on the stage, the audience will have seen it and will this needs to be acknowledged to really deliver a great show.  

-> Development:

Much like the improvisor, newer developers will often jump straight to coding a solution where they think the project is starting, rather than level setting with the client.  This often leads to mismatched expectations.  It is very necessary to understand what happened before you as a developer were engaged.  It is easy to make assumptions and that leads to 'fuzzy' requirements.  There is a study Extreme Programming and Agile Methods - XP/Agile Universe (2004 - Zannier, Carmen, Erdogmus, Hakan, Lindstrom, Lowell) which suggests these 'fuzzy' requirements are the root cause of around half of the problems which result in unsatisfied customers.

Just as the improvisor must trust that the audience actually is hyper aware of what has happened since 'lights up' the developer must come to trust that the client knows more about their organization and projects that have come before this one.  If you have no background information about previous projects then your good ideas could be met with harsh resistance that is based on a sour previous experience with a similar idea. 

Fortunately human nature makes it so that most people really like to talk about themselves.  Getting insight into the current state of the world and what brought them to that is as simple as asking clients questions like "Can you tell me about a previous project that you thought went well/poorly?" and "Why do you think we are really doing this project, as in what does it really mean for the organization?"

Similar to expectations based on past experiences, there can be a tendency to rush forward with solutions without stopping to take in the current state of the world. If a client wants faster load times and higher lead conversion, it is going to be possible to show success unless we understand exactly what the real metrics are currently and how they are measured.  For example, if we are trying to speed up a page load times based without understanding the reality of what they are currently doing that slows them down we are likely never going to be able to know when we are done.  It reminds me of the old carpentry adage "measure twice, cut once".  Really taking the steps up front, which should be paid for by the client, to measure the state of the world and set metrics is going to make it simple to know what success exactly means.     

-> How to practice this with your peers?

Exercise: 
Stating observations, then making assumptions based on those basic observations.

This game is called Obvious Observation, Agreeable Assumption.
This can be played with any size group, but 4 or more is ideal.

Round 1:

Form a circle.  
A player will walk around the center of the circle. Players on the outside, one at a time but in no specific order, will make basic, overly simplistic observations about the parson.  Great observations would be "his head is at an angle to the right" "his feet are shuffling close together" "His arms swing very loosely".  Anything that involves a specific body part and how they are positioned in relation to the rest of the body are great.  If you agree with this observation, you simply say 'yes'.  If you disagree, you will state what you see instead.  Good observations should get near unanimous agreement.

For this first round, refrain from any type of invention or assumption beyond these simplistic observations.  For example "He looks like a real estate broker" or "She seems a villan" are giant inventions that are not going to get much agreement.

Round 2:

Have the same player remain in the circle and continue their walk.  
In this round we can freely make assumptions tied to the previous observations.  Again, we need to get buy in from the group that these are valid and you will say 'yes' or make a clearer statement to modify what had been said.  For example, if in round one we observe "she has her hands pressed flat on her lower back' then in round 2 we can assume "she is supporting her back, so she much have back issues".  That would be hard to argue against.  Or "he is a 'tough guy' with that posture."  

Again we do not want to invent anything.  For example, in instead of 'back problems' someone invents that "she has been in a car wreck", there is nothing that supports that invention, so the assumption is invalid.

This is a great exercise to retrain your brain to not overlook the obvious first.  Audiences do these 2 steps almost simultaneously, so slowing down and separating the process is key to understanding it.  It is also fun to walk around with an assumed posture for a bit and see what character can develop out f just simple modifications to stance and gait.

As always, go faster than you think you can. That is called 'playing at the speed of fun.'

TL:DR

In theater the scene starts when the lights go up.  If you don't understand the start state, it is impossible to know what success would mean to the audience.  
In development, taking the time to understand what has happened before and the current situation on the ground will help you set up proper expectations with a client. 
You can practice this skill by just making overly simple observations, from which you can make solid assumptions that are easy to communicate and get agreement with.

I started this post with the Sir Arthur Conan Doyle quote because it is remarkably true.  As developers, really as computer scientists, we must learn to question everything, especially our perception and preconceived notions.  Starting from a state of assuming nothing feels unnatural at first, but the results will speak for themselves.

