##
WHY TRUTH IS HARPED ON SO DANG MUCH IN THIS WORK

It occurred to me I have not fully explained the underpinning premise of this character definition process, which is to discover rather than invent the character with things the audience will fundamentally understands as true.

This method is basically overcoming 2 issues I see with newer improvisers which I feel lead to terrible, boring and downright awful scenes.  1) Improvisors get ‘stuck in their heads’ when they are in scenes because they have no idea how that character would actually react to the new information presented.  This leads to 2) Inventions that alienate the audience.

Most improvisors I have seen and worked with will simply start from a premise.  This is fine and well and good.  Nothing wrong with a good premise and I am not here to poo-poo it.   But one of the unfortunate side effects of  is that characters are often created to fill in an aspect of that premise, basically a one dimensional outline of a person to hold the joke together.  I say unfortunate because most improvisors will be ‘stuck in the scene’ once the original use of the slapped together character has served the intended use. Now, if all we were doing was brief 30 second scenes like a really fast paced La Ronde or Ka-Blahm-O! this does not really matter.  Most scenes and formats however require us to keep these characters around for 2+ minutes, sometimes multiple scenes and sometimes for entire shows.

Let’s imagine for a minute an improvisor has come into a scene with a really solid premise scene start that gets a good little lauch. Right after the initial base reality is understood another player makes a strong physical move, doing something unexpected and the first player freezes up.  This hesitation is most likely the actor’s brain suddenly panicking because the move was unexpected and are processing how to react.  This is a hard thing to do, to think about reactions before you have them.  The most likely outcome will be some kind of invention.

I am not going to dig into the difference between discovery and invention.  There are too many other books, blogs, etc about this topic to go too deep.  But I think the reason that the audience really feels the difference.  Discoveries feel like discoveries because they are make sense to us, that it is built on the reality we have accepted so far.  Inventions feel like they do because they come out of nowhere and don’t jive well with the base reality we have worked so hard to set up so far.

But if instead the improvisor, from our previous example comes in with a full-on developed character, then no matter what happens in the scene they simply need to react as that character.  No thinking, planning or justification, just reaction.  When we see how the character behaves when surprised, we the players along with the audience have then discovered something together.  When the character just opens their mouth and the improvisor gets out of the way we can have the freedom to uncover what is assumed to be true based on the physicality, emotional state and worldview of this character.  The audience will be on board as


##
(from section on POV)
 Also, given that so much of it is subjective, how on earth do we know if we are doing it right?  Great question.  I think that if we have based our characters and work in truth of the obvious and observable, we can see what is clearly discovered or invented based on how it is regarded and how characters react.  This is not a cut and dry science, this is art after all.  Your experience will vary.
 
 ########
 (from This is How we breath)
 This is the starting place for the truth of any character.  And that is what I firmly believe we are after.  That is what the audience desperately wants.  That is what they will pay money to see.  Honest truth.
 
 ##########

( from Observations vs Assumptions)  
2) Observations of what is observably true

Once every group member has had the opportunity to listen to the breathing the group members, in no particular order, will then say things that are 100% observably true.  Such as ‘your breathing is very rapid’ or ‘your head is bobbing up and down’.  It is important to say things that are only observable and agreed on by the group.  If anyone says ‘well not really’ or ‘I disagree’ then it is retracted.  The truth of the observation must be unanimous.  When I run this I act as mediator and suggest you appoint one for your group through this exercise.

3) making assumptions based on those observations.

Once there have been a fair amount of completely agreed upon observations (happens quickly since this is a very basic , overly simple thing to do), we can then move onto what is assumed to be true based on the facts we just listed.  For instance rapid breathing and a brisk and stiff pacing to a character moments might indicate they are in a hurry.  Or that they are being pursued. Or that they are nervous.  Or any number of things, as long as the group agrees that is reasonable based on the observations.

We do not want to invent or say anything that is not based on observable facts.  So taking that same character from before, stiff and brisk paced, and saying we can assume they are relaxed and at ease would be a misstep.  Saying they are on fire is not supported by any of their actions or traits.  Saying they are a plumber is pure invention.  Saying they are running from an ex boyfriend who is actually a dragon is totally made up invention.

Giving them any sort of backstory is invention.

The goal of this approach to character is to give the audience something immediately relatable and something that feels completely honest and true.  We are still making things up, but we are doing true discovery by always starting from the real, non-disputable truth that is posture and breathing. So giant inventive jumps knock the legs out of everything we have built and make the audience well aware that we are just being clever.  This means we can’t really be real with these characters.  Ultimately it leads to a poorer experience for everyone.

If you feel like it you can extend the exercise a little further and engage this newly discovered character in scene work.

Post script notes for me (not for you)

(It occurs to me just now that I have not fully explained the underpinning premise of this character definition and trajectory rationale,  so another post will be needed to flesh this out)